FINIS. The tragedie of HAMLET, Prince of Denmarke.


off.
Exeunt. Marching: after the which, a Peale of Ordenance are shot

Go, bid the Souldiers shoote.
Becomes the Field, but heere shewes much amis.
Take vp the body; Such a sight as this
Speake lowdly for him.
The Souldiours Musicke, and the rites of Warre
And for his passage,
To haue prou'd most royally:
For he was likely, had he beene put on
Beare Hamlet like a Soldier to the Stage,
   For. Let foure Captaines

On plots, and errors happen
Lest more mischance
Euen whiles mens mindes are wilde,
But let this same be presently perform'd,
Whose voyce will draw on more:
And from his mouth
  Hor. Of that I shall haue alwayes cause to speake,
Inuite me,
Which are to claime, my vantage doth
I haue some Rites of memory in this Kingdome,
For me, with sorrow, I embrace my Fortune,
And call the Noblest to the Audience.
   For. Let vs hast to heare it,

Truly deliuer
Falne on the Inuentors head. All this can I
And in this vpshot, purposes mistooke,
Of death's put on by cunning, and forc'd cause,
Of accidentall iudgements, casuall slaughters
Of carnall, bloudie, and vnnaturall acts,
How these things came about. So shall you heare
And let me speake to th' yet vnknowing world,
High on a stage be placed to the view,
Are heere arriued. Giue order that these bodies
You from the Polake warres, and you from England
But since so iumpe vpon this bloodie question,
He neuer gaue command'ment for their death.
Had it th' abilitie of life to thanke you:
  Hor. Not from his mouth,
Where should we haue our thankes?
That Rosincrance and Guildensterne are dead:
To tell him his command'ment is fulfill'd,
The eares are senselesse that should giue vs hearing,
And our affaires from England come too late,
   Amb. The sight is dismall,

So bloodily hast strooke
That thou so many Princes, at a shoote,
What feast is toward in thine eternall Cell.
   For. His quarry cries on hauocke. Oh proud death,

If ought of woe, or wonder, cease your search
  Hor. What is it ye would see;
  Fortin. Where is this sight?

Attendants.
and
Enter Fortinbras and English Ambassador, with Drumme, Colours,
Why do's the Drumme come hither?
And flights of Angels sing thee to thy rest,
Goodnight sweet Prince,
  Hora. Now cracke a Noble heart:

Dyes

Which haue solicited. The rest is silence. O, o, o, o.
So tell him with the occurrents more and lesse,
On Fortinbras, he ha's my dying voyce,
But I do prophesie th' election lights
I cannot liue to heare the Newes from England,
The potent poyson quite ore-crowes my spirit,
   Ham. O I dye Horatio:

To th' Ambassadors of England giues this warlike volly
  Osr. Yong Fortinbras, with conquest come fro[m] Poland

Enter Osricke.
What warlike noyse is this?

March afarre off, and shout within.

To tell my Storie.
And in this harsh world draw thy breath in paine,
Absent thee from felicitie awhile,
If thou did'st euer hold me in thy heart,
(Things standing thus vnknowne) shall liue behind me.
Oh good Horatio, what a wounded name,
Let go, by Heauen Ile haue't.
   Ham. As th'art a man, giue me the Cup.

Heere's yet some Liquor left
I am more an Antike Roman then a Dane:
   Hor. Neuer beleeue it.

To the vnsatisfied
Thou liu'st, report me and my causes right
But let it be: Horatio, I am dead,
Is strick'd in his Arrest) oh I could tell you.
Had I but time (as this fell Sergeant death
That are but Mutes or audience to this acte:
You that looke pale, and tremble at this chance,
I am dead Horatio, wretched Queene adiew,
  Ham. Heauen make thee free of it, I follow thee.

Dyes.

Nor thine on me.
Mine and my Fathers death come not vpon thee,
Exchange forgiuenesse with me, Noble Hamlet;
It is a poyson temp'red by himselfe:
  Laer. He is iustly seru'd.

King Dyes.

Follow my Mother.
Drinke off this Potion: Is thy Vnion heere?
Damned Dane,
   Ham. Heere thou incestuous, murdrous,

   King. O yet defend me Friends, I am but hurt

  All. Treason, Treason

Hurts the King.

Then venome to thy worke.
   Ham. The point envenom'd too,

I can no more, the King, the King's too blame
Neuer to rise againe: Thy Mothers poyson'd:
Hath turn'd it selfe on me. Loe, heere I lye,
Vnbated and envenom'd: the foule practise
The Treacherous Instrument is in thy hand,
In thee, there is not halfe an houre of life;
No Medicine in the world can do thee good.
Hamlet, thou art slaine,
   Laer. It is heere Hamlet.

Treacherie, seeke it out
   Ham. Oh Villany! How? Let the doore be lock'd.

I am poyson'd
Oh my deere Hamlet, the drinke, the drinke,
   Qu. No, no, the drinke, the drinke.

  King. She sounds to see them bleede
   Ham. How does the Queene?

I am iustly kill'd with mine owne Treacherie
To mine Sprindge, Osricke,
  Laer. Why as a Woodcocke
  Osr. How is't Laertes?
   Hor. They bleed on both sides. How is't my Lord?

   Osr. Looke to the Queene there hoa

   Ham. Nay come, againe

  King. Part them, they are incens'd

In scuffling they change Rapiers.

   Laer. Haue at you now.

  Osr. Nothing neither way

Play.

   Laer. Say you so? Come on.

I am affear'd you make a wanton of me
I pray you passe with your best violence,
Laertes, you but dally,
   Ham. Come for the third.

   Laer. And yet 'tis almost 'gainst my conscience

   King. I do not thinke't

   Laer. My Lord, Ile hit him now

   Qu. Come, let me wipe thy face

By and by
   Ham. I dare not drinke yet Madam,

   King. It is the poyson'd Cup, it is too late

I pray you pardon me
   Qu. I will my Lord;

   King. Gertrude, do not drinke

   Ham. Good Madam

The Queene Carowses to thy fortune, Hamlet
Heere's a Napkin, rub thy browes,
   Qu. He's fat, and scant of breath.

   King. Our Sonne shall win

  Laer. A touch, a touch, I do confesse
Come: Another hit; what say you?
  Ham. Ile play this bout first, set by a-while.

Trumpets sound, and shot goes off.

Here's to thy health. Giue him the cup,
Hamlet, this Pearle is thine,
   King. Stay, giue me drinke.

   Laer. Well: againe

   Osr. A hit, a very palpable hit

   Ham. Iudgement

   Laer. No

  Ham. One

They play.

   Laer. Come on sir.

   Ham. Come on sir

And you the Iudges beare a wary eye
Now the King drinkes to Hamlet. Come, begin,
The Cannons to the Heauens, the Heauen to Earth,
The Trumpet to the Cannoneer without,
And let the Kettle to the Trumpets speake,
Giue me the Cups,
In Denmarkes Crowne haue worne.
Richer then that, which foure successiue Kings
And in the Cup an vnion shal he throw
The King shal drinke to Hamlets better breath,
Let all the Battlements their Ordinance fire,
Or quit in answer of the third exchange,
If Hamlet giue the first, or second hit,
   King. Set me the Stopes of wine vpon that Table:

  Osricke. I my good Lord

Prepare to play.

These Foyles haue all a length.
   Ham. This likes me well,

Let me see another
   Laer. This is too heauy,

But since he is better'd, we haue therefore oddes
I haue seene you both:
   King. I do not feare it,

Your Grace hath laide the oddes a'th' weaker side
   Ham. Verie well my Lord,

Cousen Hamlet, you know the wager
   King. Giue them the Foyles yong Osricke,

   Ham. No by this hand

   Laer. You mocke me Sir

Sticke fiery off indeede
Your Skill shall like a Starre i'th' darkest night,
   Ham. Ile be your foile Laertes, in mine ignorance,

   Laer. Come one for me

Giue vs the Foyles: Come on
And will this Brothers wager frankely play.
   Ham. I do embrace it freely,

And wil not wrong it
I do receiue your offer'd loue like loue,
To keepe my name vngorg'd. But till that time,
I haue a voyce, and president of peace
Till by some elder Masters of knowne Honor,
I stand aloofe, and will no reconcilement,
To my Reuenge. But in my termes of Honor
Whose motiue in this case should stirre me most
   Laer. I am satisfied in Nature,

And hurt my Mother
That I haue shot mine Arrow o're the house,
Free me so farre in your most generous thoughts,
Let my disclaiming from a purpos'd euill,
Sir, in this Audience,
His madnesse is poore Hamlets Enemy.
Hamlet is of the Faction that is wrong'd,
Who does it then? His Madnesse? If't be so,
Then Hamlet does it not, Hamlet denies it:
And when he's not himselfe, do's wrong Laertes,
If Hamlet from himselfe be tane away:
Was't Hamlet wrong'd Laertes? Neuer Hamlet.
Roughly awake, I heere proclaime was madnesse:
That might your nature honour, and exception
With sore distraction? What I haue done
And you must needs haue heard how I am punisht
This presence knowes,
But pardon't as you are a Gentleman.
   Ham. Giue me your pardon Sir, I'ue done you wrong,

  Kin. Come Hamlet, come, and take this hand from me

and Gauntlets, a Table and Flagons of Wine on it.
Foyles,
Enter King, Queene, Laertes and Lords, with other Attendants with
man ha's ought of what he leaues. What is't to leaue betimes?
be not now; yet it will come; the readinesse is all, since no
to come: if it bee not to come, it will bee now: if it
Prouidence in the fall of a sparrow. If it be now, 'tis not
   Ham. Not a whit, we defie Augury; there's a speciall

their repaire hither, and say you are not fit
   Hor. If your minde dislike any thing, obey. I will forestall

gain-giuing as would perhaps trouble a woman
   Ham. It is but foolery; but it is such a kinde of

   Hor. Nay, good my Lord

my heart: but it is no matter
oddes: but thou wouldest not thinke how all heere about
I haue beene in continuall practice; I shall winne at the
   Ham. I doe not thinke so, since he went into France,

   Hor. You will lose this wager, my Lord

them to their tryalls: the Bubbles are out
the most fond and winnowed opinions; and doe but blow
yesty collection, which carries them through & through
the time, and outward habite of encounter, a kinde of
that I know the drossie age dotes on; only got the tune of
suck't it: thus had he and mine more of the same Beauty
   Ham. He did Complie with his Dugge before hee

head
   Hor. This Lapwing runs away with the shell on his

himselfe, there are no tongues else for's tongue
   Ham. Yours, yours; hee does well to commend it

   Osr. I commend my duty to your Lordship

will
  Ham. To this effect Sir, after what flourish your nature
   Osr. Shall I redeliuer you ee'n so?

not, Ile gaine nothing but my shame, and the odde hits
King hold his purpose; I will win for him if I can: if
the Foyles bee brought, the Gentleman willing, and the
his Maiestie, 'tis the breathing time of day with me; let
   Ham. Sir, I will walke heere in the Hall; if it please

in tryall
  Osr. I meane my Lord, the opposition of your person
   Ham. How if I answere no?

Answere
imediate tryall, if your Lordship would vouchsafe the
He hath one twelue for mine, and that would come to
you and him, hee shall not exceed you three hits;
  Osr. The King Sir, hath laid that in a dozen passes betweene
the Danish; why is this impon'd as you call it?
liberall conceited Carriages, that's the French but against
against sixe French Swords: their Assignes, and three
it might be Hangers till then; but on sixe Barbary Horses
matter: If we could carry Cannon by our sides; I would
   Ham. The phrase would bee more Germaine to the

  Osr. The Carriages Sir, are the hangers
   Ham. What call you the Carriages?

carriages, and of very liberall conceit
deare to fancy, very responsiue to the hilts, most delicate
Hangers or so: three of the Carriages infaith are very
Rapiers and Poniards, with their assignes, as Girdle,
against the which he impon'd as I take it, sixe French
   Osr. The sir King ha's wag'd with him six Barbary horses,

   Ham. That's two of his weapons; but well

  Osr. Rapier and dagger
   Ham. What's his weapon?

his weapon
Sir, you are not ignorant of what excellence Laertes is at
   Osr. Nay, in good faith, for mine ease in good faith:

   Ham. I beseech you remember

Sir, this is the matter
to you, that he ha's laid a great wager on your head:
I cannot tell how: but my Lord, his Maiesty bad me signifie
   Osr. Exceedingly, my Lord, it is very soultry, as 'twere

Complexion
   Ham. Mee thinkes it is very soultry, and hot for my

   Osr. It is indifferent cold my Lord indeed

Northerly
   Ham. No, beleeue mee 'tis very cold, the winde is

   Osr. I thanke your Lordship, 'tis very hot

your Bonet to his right vse, 'tis for the head
   Ham. I will receiue it with all diligence of spirit; put

I should impart a thing to you from his Maiesty
   Osr. Sweet Lord, if your friendship were at leysure,

of dirt
Messe; 'tis a Chowgh; but as I saw spacious in the possession
be Lord of Beasts, and his Crib shall stand at the Kings
know him: he hath much Land, and fertile; let a Beast
   Ham. Thy state is the more gracious; for 'tis a vice to

  Hor. No my good Lord
   Ham. I humbly thank you Sir, dost know this waterflie?

  Osr. Your Lordship is right welcome back to Denmarke

Enter young Osricke.
   Hor. Peace, who comes heere?

Into a Towring passion
But sure the brauery of his griefe did put me
The Portraiture of his; Ile count his fauours:
For by the image of my Cause, I see
That to Laertes I forgot my selfe;
Then to say one: but I am very sorry good Horatio,
The interim's mine, and a mans life's no more
   Ham. It will be short,

What is the issue of the businesse there
   Hor. It must be shortly knowne to him from England

In further euill
To let this Canker of our nature come
To quit him with this arme? And is't not to be damn'd
And with such coozenage; is't not perfect conscience,
Throwne out his Angle for my proper life,
Popt in betweene th' election and my hopes,
He that hath kil'd my King, and whor'd my Mother,
  Ham. Does it not, thinkst thee, stand me now vpon
   Hor. Why, what a King is this?

Of mighty opposites
Betweene the passe, and fell incensed points
'Tis dangerous, when the baser nature comes
Doth by their owne insinuation grow:
They are not neere my Conscience; their debate
   Ham. Why man, they did make loue to this imployment

   Hor. So Guildensterne and Rosincrance, go too't

Thou know'st already
Was our Sea Fight, and what to this was sement,
The changeling neuer knowne: Now, the next day
Subscrib'd it, gau't th' impression, plac't it safely,
Folded the Writ vp in forme of the other,
Which was the Modell of that Danish Seale:
I had my fathers Signet in my Purse,
  Ham. Why, euen in that was Heauen ordinate;
   Hor. How was this seal'd?

Not shriuing time allowed
He should the bearers put to sodaine death,
Without debatement further, more or lesse,
That on the view and know of these Contents,
And many such like Assis of great charge,
And stand a Comma 'tweene their amities,
As Peace should still her wheaten Garland weare,
As loue betweene them, as the Palme should flourish,
As England was his faithfull Tributary,
   Ham. An earnest Coniuration from the King,

  Hor. I, good my Lord
The effects of what I wrote?
It did me Yeomans seriuce: wilt thou know
How to forget that learning: but Sir now,
A basenesse to write faire; and laboured much
I once did hold it as our Statists doe,
Deuis'd a new Commission, wrote it faire,
They had begun the Play. I sate me downe,
Ere I could make a Prologue to my braines,
   Ham. Being thus benetted round with Villaines,

  Hor. I beseech you
But wilt thou heare me how I did proceed?
  Ham. Here's the Commission, read it at more leysure:
   Hor. Ist possible?

My head should be struck off
No not to stay the grinding of the Axe,
That on the superuize no leasure bated,
With hoo, such Bugges and Goblins in my life,
Importing Denmarks health, and Englands too,
Larded with many seuerall sorts of reason;
Oh royall knauery: An exact command,
Their grand Commission, where I found Horatio,
(My feares forgetting manners) to vnseale
To mine owne roome againe, making so bold,
Finger'd their Packet, and in fine, withdrew
Grop'd I to finde out them; had my desire,
My sea-gowne scarft about me in the darke,
   Ham. Vp from my Cabin

   Hor. That is most certaine

Rough-hew them how we will
There's a Diuinity that shapes our ends,
When our deare plots do paule, and that should teach vs,
Our indiscretion sometimes serues vs well,
(And praise be rashnesse for it) let vs know,
Worse then the mutines in the Bilboes, rashly,
That would not let me sleepe; me thought I lay
  Ham. Sir, in my heart there was a kinde of fighting,
   Hor. Remember it my Lord?

You doe remember all the Circumstance
   Ham. So much for this Sir; now let me see the other,

Enter Hamlet and Horatio

Exeunt.

Till then, in patience our proceeding be.
An houre of quiet shortly shall we see;
This Graue shall haue a liuing Monument:
Good Gertrude set some watch ouer your Sonne,
Wee'l put the matter to the present push:
Strengthen your patience in our last nights speech,
  Kin. I pray you good Horatio wait vpon him,

Enter.
The Cat will Mew, and Dogge will haue his day.
Let Hercules himselfe doe what he may,
I lou'd you euer; but it is no matter:
What is the reason that you vse me thus?
   Ham. Heare you Sir:

His silence will sit drooping
When that her Golden Cuplet are disclos'd;
Anon as patient as the female Doue,
And thus awhile the fit will worke on him:
   Kin. This is meere Madnesse:

Ile rant as well as thou
Make Ossa like a wart. Nay, and thou'lt mouth,
Sindging his pate against the burning Zone,
Millions of Akers on vs; till our ground
And if thou prate of Mountaines; let them throw
Be buried quicke with her, and so will I.
To outface me with leaping in her Graue?
Ile doo't. Dost thou come heere to whine;
Woo't drinke vp Esile, eate a Crocodile?
Woo't weepe? Woo't fight? Woo't teare thy selfe?
   Ham. Come show me what thou'lt doe.

  Qu. For loue of God forbeare him
  King. Oh he is mad Laertes,
Make vp my summe. What wilt thou do for her?
Could not (with all there quantitie of Loue)
  Ham. I lou'd Ophelia; fortie thousand Brothers
   Qu. Oh my Sonne, what Theame?

Vntill my eielids will no longer wag
   Ham. Why I will fight with him vppon this Theme.

   Gen. Good my Lord be quiet

   Qu. Hamlet, Hamlet

   King. Pluck them asunder

Which let thy wisenesse feare. Away thy hand
Yet haue I something in me dangerous,
Sir though I am not Spleenatiue, and rash,
I prythee take thy fingers from my throat;
   Ham. Thou prai'st not well,

   Laer. The deuill take thy soule

Hamlet the Dane
Like wonder-wounded hearers? This is I,
Coniure the wandring Starres, and makes them stand
Beares such an Emphasis? whose phrase of Sorrow
   Ham. What is he, whose griefes

Of blew Olympus
To o're top old Pelion, or the skyish head
Till of this flat a Mountaine you haue made,
Now pile your dust, vpon the quicke, and dead,

Leaps in the graue.

Till I haue caught her once more in mine armes:
Depriu'd thee of. Hold off the earth a while,
Whose wicked deed, thy most Ingenious sence
Fall ten times trebble, on that cursed head
   Laer. Oh terrible woer,

And not t'haue strew'd thy Graue
I thought thy Bride-bed to haue deckt (sweet Maid)
I hop'd thou should'st haue bin my Hamlets wife:
  Queene. Sweets, to the sweet farewell.
  Ham. What, the faire Ophelia?
When thou liest howling?
A Ministring Angell shall my Sister be,
May Violets spring. I tell thee (churlish Priest)
And from her faire and vnpolluted flesh,
   Laer. Lay her i'th' earth,

As to peace-parted Soules
To sing sage Requiem, and such rest to her
We should prophane the seruice of the dead,
  Priest. No more be done:
   Laer. Must there no more be done ?

Of Bell and Buriall
Her Maiden strewments, and the bringing home
Yet heere she is allowed her Virgin Rites,
Shardes, Flints, and Peebles, should be throwne on her:
Till the last Trumpet. For charitable praier,
She should in ground vnsanctified haue lodg'd,
And but that great Command, o're-swaies the order,
As we haue warrantie, her death was doubtfull,
  Priest. Her Obsequies haue bin as farre inlarg'd.
   Laer. What Cerimony else?

  Ham. That is Laertes, a very Noble youth: Marke
   Laer. What Cerimony else?

Couch we a while, and mark
Fore do it owne life; 'twas some Estate.
The Coarse they follow, did with disperate hand,
And with such maimed rites? This doth betoken,
The Queene, the Courtiers. Who is that they follow,

Enter King, Queene, Laertes, and a Coffin, with Lords attendant.
But soft, but soft, aside; heere comes the King.
Should patch a Wall, t' expell the winters flaw.
Oh, that that earth, which kept the world in awe,
Might stop a hole to keepe the winde away.
Imperiall Caesar, dead and turn'd to clay,
might they not stopp a Beere-barrell?
Lome, and why of that Lome (whereto he was conuerted)
into dust; the dust is earth; of earth we make
Alexander died: Alexander was buried: Alexander returneth
with modestie enough, & likeliehood to lead it; as thus.
   Ham. No faith, not a iot. But to follow him thether

   Hor. 'Twere to consider: to curiously to consider so

till he find it stopping a bunghole
Why may not Imagination trace the Noble dust of Alexander,
   Ham. To what base vses we may returne Horatio.

   Hor. E'ene so, my Lord

   Ham. And smelt so? Puh

  Hor. E'ene so
i'th' earth?
  Ham. Dost thou thinke Alexander lookt o'this fashion
   Hor. What's that my Lord?

Horatio tell me one thing
fauour she must come. Make her laugh at that: prythee
Chamber, and tell her, let her paint an inch thicke, to this
Ieering? Quite chopfalne? Now get you to my Ladies
set the Table on a Rore? No one now to mock your own
Songs? Your flashes of Merriment that were wont to
Where be your Iibes now? Your Gambals? Your
hung those lipps, that I haue kist I know not how oft.
abhorred my Imagination is, my gorge rises at it. Heere
hath borne me on his backe a thousand times: And how
a fellow of infinite Iest; of most excellent fancy, he
   Ham. Let me see. Alas poore Yorick, I knew him Horatio,

  Clo. E'ene that
   Ham. This?

Sir, this same Scull sir, was Yoricks Scull, the Kings Iester
Flaggon of Renish on my head once. This same Scull
   Clo. A pestilence on him for a mad Rogue, a pour'd a

  Ham. Nay, I know not
Whose doe you thinke it was?
  Clo. A whoreson mad Fellowes it was;
   Ham. Whose was it?

now: this Scul, has laine in the earth three & twenty years
is a sore Decayer of your horson dead body. Heres a Scull
he will keepe out water a great while. And your water,
  Clo. Why sir, his hide is so tan'd with his Trade, that
   Ham. Why he, more then another?

yeare. A Tanner will last you nine yeare
the laying in) he will last you some eight yeare, or nine
many pocky Coarses now adaies, that will scarce hold
  Clo. Ifaith, if he be not rotten before he die (as we haue
   Ham. How long will a man lie i'th' earth ere he rot?

heere, man and Boy thirty yeares
  Clo. Why heere in Denmarke: I haue bin sixeteene
   Ham. Vpon what ground?

  Clo. Faith e'ene with loosing his wits
   Ham. How strangely?

  Clo. Very strangely they say
   Ham. How came he mad?

mad as he
  Clo. 'Twill not be seene in him, there the men are as
   Ham. Why?

wits there; or if he do not, it's no great matter there
  Clo. Why, because he was mad; hee shall recouer his
   Ham. I marry, why was he sent into England?

that was mad, and sent into England
It was the very day, that young Hamlet was borne, hee
  Clo. Cannot you tell that? euery foole can tell that:
   Ham. How long is that since?

that our last King Hamlet o'recame Fortinbras
  Clo. Of all the dayes i'th' yeare, I came too't that day
Kibe. How long hast thou been a Graue-maker?
comes so neere the heeles of our Courtier, hee galls his
the Age is growne so picked, that the toe of the Pesant
Lord Horatio, these three yeares I haue taken note of it,
by the Carde, or equiuocation will vndoe vs: by the
   Ham. How absolute the knaue is? wee must speake

shee's dead
  Clo. One that was a woman Sir; but rest her Soule,
   Ham. Who is to be buried in't?

  Clo. For none neither
   Ham. What woman then?

  Clo. For no man Sir
   Ham. What man dost thou digge it for?

to you
   Clo. 'Tis a quicke lye Sir, 'twill away againe from me

lyest
'tis for the dead, not for the quicke, therefore thou
   Ham. Thou dost lye in't, to be in't and say 'tis thine:

for my part, I doe not lye in't; and yet it is mine
   Clo. You lye out on't Sir, and therefore it is not yours:

   Ham. I thinke it be thine indeed: for thou liest in't

for such a Guest is meete
O a Pit of Clay for to be made,
  Clo. Mine Sir:
this Sir?
in that. I will speake to this fellow: whose Graue's
   Ham. They are Sheepe and Calues that seek out assurance

  Hor. I my Lord, and of Calue-skinnes too
   Ham. Is not Parchment made of Sheep-skinnes?

  Hor. Not a iot more, my Lord
haue no more? ha?
hardly lye in this Boxe; and must the Inheritor himselfe
Indentures? the very Conueyances of his Lands will
ones too, then the length and breadth of a paire of
Vouchers vouch him no more of his Purchases, and double
to haue his fine Pate full of fine Dirt? will his
Is this the fine of his Fines, and the recouery of his Recoueries,
his Fines, his double Vouchers, his Recoueries:
time a great buyer of Land, with his Statutes, his Recognizances,
his Action of Battery? hum. This fellow might be in's
the Sconce with a dirty Shouell, and will not tell him of
doe's he suffer this rude knaue now to knocke him about
Quillets? his Cases? his Tenures, and his Tricks? why
Scull of a Lawyer? where be his Quiddits now? his
   Ham. There's another: why might not that bee the

for such a Guest is meete
O a Pit of Clay for to be made,
for and a shrowding-Sheete:
   Clowne sings. A Pickhaxe and a Spade, a Spade,

on't
to play at Loggets with 'em? mine ake to thinke
see't. Did these bones cost no more the breeding, but
Spade; heere's fine Reuolution, if wee had the tricke to
Chaplesse, and knockt about the Mazard with a Sextons
   Ham. Why ee'n so: and now my Lady Wormes,

  Hor. I, my Lord
a ones Horse, when he meant to begge it; might it not?
might be my Lord such a one, that prais'd my Lord such
sweet Lord: how dost thou, good Lord? this
   Ham. Or of a Courtier, which could say, Good Morrow

  Hor. It might, my Lord
one that could circumuent God, might it not?
might be the Pate of a Polititian which this Asse o're Offices:
were Caines Iaw-bone, that did the first murther: It
once: how the knaue iowles it to th' grownd, as if it
   Ham. That Scull had a tongue in it, and could sing

as if I had neuer beene such
And hath shipped me intill the Land,
hath caught me in his clutch:
   Clowne sings. But Age with his stealing steps

the daintier sense
   Ham. 'Tis ee'n so; the hand of little Imployment hath

  Hor. Custome hath made it in him a property of easinesse
he sings at Graue-making?
   Ham. Ha's this fellow no feeling of his businesse, that

O me thought there was nothing meete
To contract O the time for a my behoue,
me thought it was very sweete:
In youth when I did loue, did loue,

Sings.

to Yaughan, fetch me a stoupe of Liquor.
Houses that he makes, lasts till Doomesday: go, get thee
you are ask't this question next, say a Graue-maker: the
dull Asse will not mend his pace with beating; and when
  Clo. Cudgell thy braines no more about it; for your

Enter Hamlet and Horatio a farre off.
   Other. Masse, I cannot tell.

   Clo. Too't

   Other. Marry, now I can tell

  Clo. I, tell me that, and vnyoake
or a Carpenter?
   Other. Who builds stronger then a Mason, a Shipwright,

may doe well to thee. Too't againe, Come
built stronger then the Church: Argall, the Gallowes
that doe ill: now, thou dost ill to say the Gallowes is
does well; but how does it well? it does well to those
   Clo. I like thy wit well in good faith, the Gallowes

thousand Tenants
  Other. The Gallowes maker; for that Frame outliues a
Mason, the Shipwright, or the Carpenter?
   Clo. What is he that builds stronger then either the

  Other. Go too
thy selfe-
to thee; if thou answerest me not to the purpose, confesse
could hee digge without Armes? Ile put another question
the Scripture? the Scripture sayes Adam dig'd;
   Clo. What, ar't a Heathen? how doth thou vnderstand

   Other. Why he had none

  Clo. He was the first that euer bore Armes
   Other. Was he a Gentleman?

Adams Profession
but Gardiners, Ditchers and Graue-makers; they hold vp
Come, my Spade; there is no ancient Gentlemen,
drowne or hang themselues, more then their euen Christian.
great folke should haue countenance in this world to
   Clo. Why there thou say'st. And the more pitty that

out of Christian Buriall
beene a Gentlewoman, shee should haue beene buried
   Other. Will you ha the truth on't: if this had not

  Clo. I marry is't, Crowners Quest Law
   Other. But is this law?

guilty of his owne death, shortens not his owne life
him; hee drownes not himselfe. Argall, hee that is not
marke you that? But if the water come to him & drowne
and drowne himselfe; it is will he nill he, he goes;
heere stands the man; good: If the man goe to this water
   Clown. Giue me leaue; heere lies the water; good:

   Other. Nay but heare you Goodman Deluer

wittingly
Act to doe and to performe; argall she drown'd her selfe
an Act: and an Act hath three branches. It is an
heere lies the point; If I drowne my selfe wittingly, it argues
   Clo. It must be Se offendendo, it cannot bee else: for

  Other. Why 'tis found so
her owne defence?
   Clo. How can that be, vnlesse she drowned her selfe in

buriall
straight, the Crowner hath sate on her, and finds it Christian
  Other. I tell thee she is, and therefore make her Graue
wilfully seekes her owne saluation?
  Clown. Is she to bee buried in Christian buriall, that

Enter two Clownes.

Exeunt.

Therefore let's follow.
Now feare I this will giue it start againe;
How much I had to doe to calme his rage?
  Kin. Let's follow, Gertrude:

Enter.
But that this folly doubts it.
I haue a speech of fire, that faine would blaze,
The woman will be out: Adue my Lord,
Let shame say what it will; when these are gone
It is our tricke, Nature her custome holds,
And therefore I forbid my teares: but yet
   Laer. Too much of water hast thou poore Ophelia,

  Queen. Drown'd, drown'd
   Laer. Alas then, is she drown'd?

To muddy death
Pul'd the poore wretch from her melodious buy,
Till that her garments, heauy with her drinke,
Vnto that Element: but long it could not be,
Or like a creature Natiue, and indued
As one incapable of her owne distresse,
Which time she chaunted snatches of old tunes,
And Mermaid-like, a while they bore her vp,
Fell in the weeping Brooke, her cloathes spred wide,
When downe the weedy Trophies, and her selfe,
Clambring to hang; an enuious sliuer broke,
There on the pendant boughes, her Coronet weeds
But our cold Maids doe Dead Mens Fingers call them:
That liberall Shepheards giue a grosser name;
Of Crow-flowers, Nettles, Daysies, and long Purples,
There with fantasticke Garlands did she come,
That shewes his hore leaues in the glassie streame:
  Queen. There is a Willow growes aslant a Brooke,
   Laer. Drown'd! O where?

So fast they'l follow: your Sister's drown'd Laertes
  Queen. One woe doth tread vpon anothers heele,

Enter Queene.
Our purpose may hold there; how sweet Queene.
If he by chance escape your venom'd stuck,
A Challice for the nonce; whereon but sipping,
And that he cals for drinke; Ile haue prepar'd him
As make your bowts more violent to the end,
I ha't: when in your motion you are hot and dry,
Wee'l make a solemne wager on your commings,
If this should blast in proofe: Soft, let me see
Should haue a backe or second, that might hold,
'Twere better not assaid; therefore this Proiect
And that our drift looke through our bad performance,
May fit vs to our shape, if this should faile;
Weigh what conuenience both of time and meanes
   Kin. Let's further thinke of this,

It may be death
With this contagion, that if I gall him slightly,
That is but scratcht withall: Ile touch my point,
Vnder the Moone, can saue the thing from death,
Collected from all Simples that haue Vertue
Where it drawes blood, no Cataplasme so rare,
So mortall, I but dipt a knife in it,
I bought an Vnction of a Mountebanke
And for that purpose Ile annoint my Sword:
   Laer. I will doo't.

Requit him for your Father
A Sword vnbaited, and in a passe of practice,
Or with a little shuffling, you may choose
Will not peruse the Foiles? So that with ease,
Most generous, and free from all contriuing,
And wager on your heads, he being remisse,
The Frenchman gaue you, bring you in fine together,
And set a double varnish on the fame
Wee'l put on those shall praise your excellence,
Hamlet return'd, shall know you are come home:
Will you doe this, keepe close within your Chamber,
Reuenge should haue no bounds: but good Laertes
   Kin. No place indeed should murder Sancturize;

  Laer. To cut his throat i'th' Church
More then in words?
To show your selfe your Fathers sonne indeed,
Hamlet comes backe: what would you vndertake,
Time qualifies the sparke and fire of it:
And that I see in passages of proofe,
But that I know Loue is begun by Time:
  Kin. Not that I thinke you did not loue your Father,
  Laer. Why aske you this?
A face without a heart?
Or are you like the painting of a sorrow,
  Kin. Laertes was your Father deare to you?
   Laer. Why out of this, my Lord?

Now out of this
Your sodaine comming ore to play with him;
That he could nothing doe but wish and begge,
Did Hamlet so envenom with his Enuy,
If one could match you Sir. This report of his
That he cryed out, t'would be a sight indeed,
And for your Rapier most especiall,
For Art and exercise in your defence;
And gaue you such a Masterly report,
   Kin. Hee mad confession of you,

And Iemme of all our Nation
   Laer. I know him well, he is the Brooch indeed,

   Kin. The very same

   Laer. Vpon my life Lamound

  Kin. A Norman
   Laer. A Norman was't?

Come short of what he did
That I in forgery of shapes and trickes,
With the braue Beast, so farre he past my thought,
As had he beene encorps't and demy-Natur'd
And to such wondrous doing brought his Horse,
Had witchcraft in't; he grew into his Seat,
And they ran well on Horsebacke; but this Gallant
I'ue seene my selfe, and seru'd against the French,
Here was a Gentleman of Normandy,
And call it accident: Some two Monthes hence
But euen his Mother shall vncharge the practice,
And for his death no winde of blame shall breath,
Vnder the which he shall not choose but fall;
To an exployt now ripe in my Deuice,
No more to vndertake it; I will worke him
As checking at his Voyage, and that he meanes
   Kin. To thine owne peace: if he be now return'd,

  Laer. If so you'l not o'rerule me to a peace
How otherwise will you be rul'd by me?
   Kin. If it be so Laertes, as how should it be so:

Thus diddest thou
That I shall liue and tell him to his teeth;
It warmes the very sicknesse in my heart,
  Laer. I'm lost in it my Lord; but let him come,
here he sayes alone: Can you aduise me?
  Kin. 'Tis Hamlets Character, naked and in a Postscript
  Laer. Know you the hand?
Or is it some abuse? Or no such thing?
What should this meane? Are all the rest come backe?
Hamlet.
th' Occasions of my sodaine, and more strange returne.
Eyes. When I shall (first asking your Pardon thereunto) recount
Kingdome. To morrow shall I begge leaue to see your Kingly
High and Mighty, you shall know I am set naked on your

Exit Messenger

Leaue vs.
   King. Laertes you shall heare them:

They were giuen me by Claudio, he receiu'd them
  Mes. Saylors my Lord they say, I saw them not:
   King. From Hamlet? Who brought them?

Maiesty: this to the Queene
  Mes. Letters my Lord from Hamlet, This to your
How now? What Newes?

Enter a Messenger.
And that I hope will teach you to imagine-
I lou'd your Father, and we loue our Selfe,
And thinke it pastime. You shortly shall heare more,
That we can let our Beard be shooke with danger,
That we are made of stuffe, so flat, and dull,
You must not thinke
   King. Breake not your sleepes for that,

For her perfections. But my reuenge will come
Stood Challenger on mount of all the Age
Who was (if praises may go backe againe)
A Sister driuen into desperate tearmes,
   Laer. And so haue I a Noble Father lost,

And not where I had arm'd them
Would haue reuerted to my Bow againe,
Too slightly timbred for so loud a Winde,
Conuert his Gyues to Graces. So that my Arrowes
Would like the Spring that turneth Wood to Stone,
Who dipping all his Faults in their affection,
Is the great loue the generall gender beare him,
Why to a publike count I might not go,
I could not but by her. The other Motiue,
That as the Starre moues not but in his Sphere,
She's so coniunctiue to my life, and soule;
My Vertue or my Plague, be it either which,
Liues almost by his lookes: and for my selfe,
And yet to me they are strong. The Queen his Mother,
Which may to you (perhaps) seeme much vnsinnowed,
  King. O for two speciall Reasons,
You mainly were stirr'd vp?
As by your Safety, Wisedome, all things else,
So crimefull, and so Capitall in Nature,
Why you proceeded not against these feates,
   Laer. It well appeares. But tell me,

Pursued my life
That he which hath your Noble Father slaine,
Sith you haue heard, and with a knowing eare,
And you must put me in your heart for Friend,
  King. Now must your conscience my acquittance seal,

Enter King and Laertes.

Enter.
To him from whom you brought them.
And do't the speedier, that you may direct me
Come, I will giue you way for these your Letters,
Hamlet.
He that thou knowest thine,
I haue much to tell thee, Farewell.
and Guildensterne, hold their course for England. Of them
These good Fellowes will bring thee where I am. Rosincrance
dumbe, yet are they much too light for the bore of the Matter.
flye death. I haue words to speake in your eare, will make thee
sent, and repaire thou to me with as much hast as thou wouldest
a good turne for them. Let the King haue the Letters I haue
Theeues of Mercy, but they knew what they did. I am to doe
I alone became their Prisoner. They haue dealt with mee, like
boorded them: On the instant they got cleare of our Shippe, so
slow of Saile, we put on a compelled Valour. In the Grapple, I
Warlicke appointment gaue vs Chace. Finding our selues too
for him. Ere we were two dayes old at Sea, a Pyrate of very
Fellowes some meanes to the King: They haue Letters
Horatio, When thou shalt haue ouerlook'd this, giue these

Reads the Letter.

to know it is.
bound for England, if your name be Horatio, as I am let
for you Sir: It comes from th' Ambassadours that was
   Say. Hee shall Sir, and't please him. There's a Letter

   Hor. Let him blesse thee too

  Say. God blesse you Sir

Enter Saylor.
I should be greeted, if not from Lord Hamlet.
I do not know from what part of the world
   Hor. Let them come in,

  Ser. Saylors sir, they say they haue Letters for you
  Hora. What are they that would speake with me?

Enter Horatio, with an Attendant.

Exeunt.

I pray you go with me.
And where th' offence is, let the great Axe fall.
   King. So you shall:

That I must call in question
Cry to be heard, as 'twere from Heauen to Earth,
No Noble rite, nor formall ostentation,
No Trophee, Sword, nor Hatchment o're his bones,
His meanes of death, his obscure buriall;
   Laer. Let this be so:

To giue it due content
And we shall ioyntly labour with your soule
Be you content to lend your patience to vs,
To you in satisfaction. But if not,
Our Crowne, our Life, and all that we call Ours
They finde vs touch'd, we will our Kingdome giue,
If by direct or by Colaterall hand
And they shall heare and iudge 'twixt you and me;
Make choice of whom your wisest Friends you will,
Or you deny me right: go but apart,
  King. Laertes, I must common with your greefe,
  Laer. Do you see this, you Gods?

Exeunt. Ophelia

God buy ye.
And of all Christian Soules, I pray God.
Gramercy on his Soule.
He is gone, he is gone, and we cast away mone,
All Flaxen was his Pole:
His Beard as white as Snow,
He neuer wil come againe.
No, no, he is dead, go to thy Death-bed,
And will he not come againe:
   Ophe. And will he not come againe,

She turnes to Fauour, and to prettinesse
   Laer. Thought, and Affliction, Passion, Hell it selfe:

For bonny sweet Robin is all my ioy
They say, he made a good end;
some Violets, but they wither'd all when my Father dyed:
with a difference. There's a Daysie, I would giue you
Herbe-Grace a Sundaies: Oh you must weare your Rew
Rew for you, and heere's some for me. Wee may call it
   Ophe. There's Fennell for you, and Columbines: ther's

fitted
   Laer. A document in madnesse, thoughts & remembrance

Thoughts
Pray loue remember: and there is Paconcies, that's for
   Ophe. There's Rosemary, that's for Remembraunce.

   Laer. This nothings more then matter

the false Steward that stole his masters daughter
him a-downe-a. Oh, how the wheele becomes it? It is
   Ophe. You must sing downe a-downe, and you call

it could not moue thus
   Laer. Had'st thou thy wits, and did'st perswade Reuenge,

Fare you well my Doue
And on his graue raines many a teare,
Hey non nony, nony, hey nony:
   Ophe. They bore him bare fac'd on the Beer,

After the thing it loues
It sends some precious instance of it selfe
Nature is fine in Loue, and where 'tis fine,
Should be as mortall as an old mans life?
Oh Heauens, is't possible, a yong Maids wits,
Deere Maid, kinde Sister, sweet Ophelia:
Till our Scale turnes the beame. Oh Rose of May,
By Heauen, thy madnesse shall be payed by waight,
Burne out the Sence and Vertue of mine eye.
Oh heate drie vp my Braines, teares seuen times salt,
  Laer. How now? what noise is that?

Enter Ophelia.

A noise within. Let her come in.

As day do's to your eye.
It shall as leuell to your Iudgement pierce
And am most sensible in greefe for it,
That I am guiltlesse of your Fathers death,
Like a good Childe, and a true Gentleman.
   King. Why now you speake

Repast them with my blood
And like the kinde Life-rend'ring Politician,
   La. To his good Friends, thus wide Ile ope my Armes:

   King. Will you know them then

   Laer. None but his Enemies

Winner and Looser
That Soop-stake you will draw both Friend and Foe,
Of your deere Fathers death, if writ in your reuenge,
If you desire to know the certaintie
   King. Good Laertes:

They shall go farre with little
And for my meanes, Ile husband them so well,
  Laer. My Will, not all the world,
   King. Who shall stay you?

Most throughly for my Father
Let come what comes: onely Ile be reueng'd
That both the worlds I giue to negligence,
I dare Damnation: to this point I stand,
Conscience and Grace, to the profoundest Pit.
To hell Allegeance: Vowes, to the blackest diuell.
   Laer. How came he dead? Ile not be Iuggel'd with.

   King. Let him demand his fill

   Qu. But not by him

  King. Dead
   Laer. Where's my Father?

Speake man
Why thou art thus Incenst? Let him go Gertrude.
Acts little of his will. Tell me Laertes,
That Treason can but peepe to what it would,
There's such Diuinity doth hedge a King,
Let him go Gertrude: Do not feare our person:
That thy Rebellion lookes so Gyant-like?
   King. What is the cause Laertes,

Of my true Mother
Euen heere betweene the chaste vnsmirched brow
Cries Cuckold to my Father, brands the Harlot
Proclaimes me Bastard:
   Laer. That drop of blood, that calmes

   Qu. Calmely good Laertes

Oh thou vilde King, giue me my Father
   Laer. I thanke you: Keepe the doore.

   Al. We will, we will

   Laer. I pray you giue me leaue

   All. No, let's come in

   Laer. Where is the King, sirs? Stand you all without

  King. The doores are broke

Noise within. Enter Laertes.

Oh this is Counter you false Danish Dogges.
   Qu. How cheerefully on the false Traile they cry,

Laertes shall be King, Laertes King
Caps, hands, and tongues, applaud it to the clouds,
They cry choose we? Laertes shall be King,
The Ratifiers and props of euery word,
Antiquity forgot, Custome not knowne,
And as the world were now but to begin,
Ore-beares your Officers, the rabble call him Lord,
Then young Laertes, in a Riotous head,
Eates not the Flats with more impittious haste
The Ocean (ouer-peering of his List)
  Mes. Saue your selfe, my Lord.
Let them guard the doore. What is the matter?
  King. Where are my Switzers?
  Qu. Alacke, what noyse is this?

Enter a Messenger.

A Noise within.

Giues me superfluous death.
Like to a murdering Peece in many places,
In eare and eare. O my deere Gertrude, this,
Will nothing sticke our persons to Arraigne
Where in necessitie of matter Beggard,
With pestilent Speeches of his Fathers death,
And wants not Buzzers to infect his eare
Keepes on his wonder, keepes himselfe in clouds,
Her Brother is in secret come from France,
Last, and as much containing as all these,
Without the which we are Pictures, or meere Beasts.
Diuided from her selfe, and her faire Iudgement,
In hugger mugger to interre him. Poore Ophelia
For good Polonius death; and we haue done but greenly
Thicke and vnwholsome in their thoughts, and whispers
Of his owne iust remoue: the people muddied,
Next your Sonne gone, and he most violent Author
But in Battalians. First, her Father slaine,
When sorrowes comes, they come not single spies,
All from her Fathers death. Oh Gertrude, Gertrude,
Oh this is the poyson of deepe greefe, it springs
Giue her good watch I pray you:
  King. Follow her close,

Enter.
Goodnight, goodnight.
Coach: Goodnight Ladies: Goodnight sweet Ladies:
and so I thanke you for your good counsell. Come, my
lay him i'th' cold ground: My brother shall knowe of it,
but I cannot choose but weepe, to thinke they should
  Ophe. I hope all will be well. We must bee patient,
   King. How long hath she bin thus?

And thou hadst not come to my bed
So would I ha done by yonder Sunne,
You promis'd me to Wed:
Quoth she before you tumbled me,
By Cocke they are too blame.
Yong men wil doo't, if they come too't,
Alacke, and fie for shame:
By gis, and by S[aint]. Charity,
   Ophe. Indeed la? without an oath Ile make an end ont.

   King. Pretty Ophelia

Let in the Maid, that out a Maid, neuer departed more
Then vp he rose, & don'd his clothes, & dupt the chamber dore,
And I a Maid at your Window, to be your Valentine.
To morrow is S[aint]. Valentines day, all in the morning betime,
they aske you what it meanes, say you this:
   Ophe. Pray you let's haue no words of this: but when

   King. Conceit vpon her Father

know not what we may be. God be at your Table
a Bakers daughter. Lord, wee know what we are, but
  Ophe. Well, God dil'd you. They say the Owle was
   King. How do ye, pretty Lady?

With true-loue showres
Which bewept to the graue did not go,
   Ophe. Larded with sweet Flowers:

   Qu. Alas, looke heere my Lord

White his Shrow'd as the Mountaine Snow
   Ophe. Pray you marke.

  Qu. Nay but Ophelia

Enter King.
At his head a grasse-greene Turfe, at his heeles a stone.
He is dead and gone Lady, he is dead and gone,
  Ophe. Say you? Nay pray you marke.
   Qu. Alas sweet Lady: what imports this Song?

By his Cockle hat and staffe, and his Sandal shoone
  Ophe. How should I your true loue know from another one?
   Qu. How now Ophelia?

  Ophe. Where is the beauteous Maiesty of Denmark

Enter Ophelia distracted.
It spill's it selfe, in fearing to be spilt.
So full of Artlesse iealousie is guilt,
Each toy seemes Prologue, to some great amisse,
To my sicke soule (as sinnes true Nature is)
In ill breeding minds. Let her come in.
For she may strew dangerous coniectures
   Qu. 'Twere good she were spoken with,

Though nothing sure, yet much vnhappily
Indeed would make one thinke there would be thought,
Which as her winkes, and nods, and gestures yeeld them,
And botch the words vp fit to their owne thoughts,
The hearers to Collection; they ayme at it,
Yet the vnshaped vse of it doth moue
That carry but halfe sense: Her speech is nothing,
Spurnes enuiously at Strawes, speakes things in doubt,
There's trickes i'th' world, and hems, and beats her heart,
  Hor. She speakes much of her Father; saies she heares
   Qu. What would she haue?

will needs be pittied
   Hor. She is importunate, indeed distract, her moode

  Qu. I will not speake with her

Enter Queene and Horatio.

Enter.
   For. Go safely on.

   Cap. I will doo't, my Lord

And let him know so
We shall expresse our dutie in his eye,
If that his Maiesty would ought with vs,
Ouer his Kingdome. You know the Rendeuous:
Claimes the conueyance of a promis'd March
Tell him that by his license, Fortinbras
  For. Go Captaine, from me greet the Danish King,

Enter Fortinbras with an Armie.

Exit

How ere my happes, my ioyes were ne're begun.
And thou must cure me: Till I know 'tis done,
For like the Hecticke in my blood he rages,
The present death of Hamlet. Do it England,
By Letters coniuring to that effect
Our Soueraigne Processe, which imports at full
Payes homage to vs; thou maist not coldly set
After the Danish Sword, and thy free awe
Since yet thy Cicatrice lookes raw and red
As my great power thereof may giue thee sense,
And England, if my loue thou holdst at ought,
That else leanes on th' Affaire, pray you make hast.
Away, for euery thing is Seal'd and done
Delay it not, Ile haue him hence to night.
Tempt him with speed aboord:
  King. Follow him at foote,

Exit

for England.
wife: man & wife is one flesh, and so my mother. Come,
   Hamlet. My Mother: Father and Mother is man and

   King. Thy louing Father Hamlet

England. Farewell deere Mother
   Ham. I see a Cherube that see's him: but come, for

   King. So is it, if thou knew'st our purposes

   Ham. Good

  King. I Hamlet
   Ham. For England?

For England
Th' Associates tend, and euery thing at bent
The Barke is readie, and the winde at helpe,
With fierie Quicknesse. Therefore prepare thy selfe,
For that which thou hast done, must send thee hence
Which we do tender, as we deerely greeue
   K. Hamlet, this deed of thine, for thine especial safety

   Ham. He will stay till ye come

   King. Go seeke him there

shall nose him as you go vp the staires into the Lobby
selfe: but indeed, if you finde him not this moneth, you
finde him not there, seeke him i'th other place your
   Ham. In heauen, send thither to see. If your Messenger

   King. Where is Polonius

a Progresse through the guts of a Begger
  Ham. Nothing but to shew you how a King may go
   King. What dost thou meane by this?

but to one Table that's the end
and your leane Begger is but variable seruice to dishes,
to fat vs, and we fat our selfe for Magots. Your fat King,
is your onely Emperor for diet. We fat all creatures else
conuocation of wormes are e'ne at him. Your worm
  Ham. Not where he eats, but where he is eaten, a certaine
   King. At Supper? Where?

  Ham. At Supper
  King. Now Hamlet, where's Polonius?

Enter Hamlet and Guildensterne.
   Rosin. Hoa, Guildensterne? Bring in my Lord.

   King. Bring him before vs

pleasure
  Rosin. Without my Lord, guarded to know your
   King. But where is he?

We cannot get from him
  Rosin. Where the dead body is bestow'd my Lord,
How now? What hath befalne?

Enter Rosincrane.
Or not at all.
By desperate appliance are releeued,
Deliberate pause, diseases desperate growne,
This sodaine sending him away, must seeme
But neerer the offence: to beare all smooth, and euen,
And where 'tis so, th' Offenders scourge is weigh'd
Who like not in their iudgement, but their eyes:
Hee's loued of the distracted multitude,
Yet must not we put the strong Law on him:
How dangerous is it that this man goes loose:
  King. I haue sent to seeke him, and to find the bodie:

Enter King.

Exeunt.

after.
  Ham. Of nothing: bring me to him, hide Fox, and all
  Guild. A thing my Lord?
with the body. The King, is a thing-
   Ham. The body is with the King, but the King is not

and go with vs to the King
   Rosin. My Lord, you must tell vs where the body is,

foolish eare
   Ham. I am glad of it: a knauish speech sleepes in a

   Rosin. I vnderstand you not my Lord

you, and Spundge you shall be dry againe
when he needes what you haue glean'd, it is but squeezing
the corner of his iaw, first mouth'd to be last swallowed,
best seruice in the end. He keepes them like an Ape in
Rewards, his Authorities (but such Officers do the King
  Ham. I sir, that sokes vp the Kings Countenance, his
   Rosin. Take you me for a Spundge, my Lord?

should be made by the Sonne of a King
owne. Besides, to be demanded of a Spundge, what replication
  Ham. That I can keepe your counsell, and not mine
   Rosin. Beleeue what?

   Ham. Do not beleeue it

And beare it to the Chappell
   Rosin. Tell vs where 'tis, that we may take it thence,

  Ham. Compounded it with dust, whereto 'tis Kinne
  Ro. What haue you done my Lord with the dead body?

Enter Ros. and Guildensterne.
Oh heere they come.
   Ham. What noise? Who cals on Hamlet?

   Gentlemen within. Hamlet, Lord Hamlet

  Ham. Safely stowed

Enter Hamlet.

Exeunt.

My soule is full of discord and dismay.
And what's vntimely done. Oh come away,
To let them know both what we meane to do,
Come Gertrude, wee'l call vp our wisest friends,

Exit Gent.
Into the Chappell. I pray you hast in this.
Go seeke him out, speake faire, and bring the body
And from his Mother Clossets hath he drag'd him.
Hamlet in madnesse hath Polonius slaine,
Friends both go ioyne you with some further ayde:
Ho Guildenstern:

Enter Ros. & Guild.
Both countenance, and excuse.
We must with all our Maiesty and Skill
But we will ship him hence, and this vilde deed,
The Sun no sooner shall the Mountaines touch,
   King. Oh Gertrude, come away:

Shewes it selfe pure. He weepes for what is done
Among a Minerall of Mettels base
O're whom his very madnesse like some Oare
  Qu. To draw apart the body he hath kild,
Euen on the pith of life. Where is he gone?
To keepe it from divulging, let's it feede
But like the Owner of a foule disease,
We would not vnderstand what was most fit,
This mad yong man. But so much was our loue,
Should haue kept short, restrain'd, and out of haunt,
It will be laide to vs, whose prouidence
Alas, how shall this bloody deede be answered?
To you your selfe, to vs, to euery one.
His Liberty is full of threats to all,
It had bin so with vs had we beene there:
   King. Oh heauy deed:

The vnseene good old man
And in his brainish apprehension killes
He whips his Rapier out, and cries a Rat, a Rat,
Behinde the Arras, hearing something stirre,
Which is the Mightier, in his lawlesse fit
  Qu. Mad as the Seas, and winde, when both contend
  King. What Gertrude? How do's Hamlet?
  Qu. Ah my good Lord, what haue I seene to night?
Where is your Sonne?
You must translate; Tis fit we vnderstand them.
These profound heaues
  King. There's matters in these sighes.

Enter King.

Exit Hamlet tugging in Polonius.
Good night Mother.
Come sir, to draw toward an end with you.
Who was in life, a foolish prating Knaue.
Is now most still, most secret, and most graue,
Mother goodnight. Indeede this Counsellor
Ile lugge the Guts into the Neighbor roome,
   Ham. This man shall set me packing:

  Qu. Alacke I had forgot: 'Tis so concluded on
   Ham. I must to England, you know that?

What thou hast saide to me
And breath of life: I haue no life to breath
   Qu. Be thou assur'd, if words be made of breath,

And breake your owne necke downe
To try Conclusions in the Basket, creepe
Let the Birds flye, and like the famous Ape
Vnpegge the Basket on the houses top:
No in despight of Sense and Secrecie,
Such deere concernings hide, Who would do so,
Would from a Paddocke, from a Bat, a Gibbe,
For who that's but a Queene, faire, sober, wise,
But made in craft. 'Twere good you let him know,
That I essentially am not in madnesse,
Make you to rauell all this matter out,
Or padling in your necke with his damn'd Fingers,
And let him for a paire of reechie kisses,
Pinch Wanton on your cheeke, call you his Mouse,
Let the blunt King tempt you againe to bed,
  Ham. Not this by no meanes that I bid you do:
   Qu. What shall I do?

Thus bad begins and worse remaines behinde
I must be cruell, onely to be kinde;
The death I gaue him: so againe, good night.
I will bestow him, and will answer well
That I must be their Scourge and Minister.
To punish me with this, and this with me,
I do repent: but heauen hath pleas'd it so,
Ile blessing begge of you. For this same Lord,
And when you are desirous to be blest,
To the next abstinence. Once more goodnight,
And that shall lend a kinde of easinesse
Assume a Vertue, if you haue it not, refraine to night,
Good night, but go not to mine Vnkles bed,
And liue the purer with the other halfe.
   Ham. O throw away the worser part of it,

Thou hast cleft my heart in twaine
   Qu. Oh Hamlet,

Yea courb, and woe, for leaue to do him good
Vertue it selfe, of Vice must pardon begge,
For in the fatnesse of this pursie times,
To make them ranke. Forgiue me this my Vertue,
And do not spred the Compost on the Weedes,
Repent what's past, auoyd what is to come,
Infects vnseene. Confesse your selfe to Heauen,
Whil'st ranke Corruption mining all within,
It will but skin and filme the Vlcerous place,
That not your trespasse, but my madnesse speakes:
Lay not a flattering Vnction to your soule,
Would gamboll from. Mother, for loue of Grace,
And I the matter will re-word: which madnesse
That I haue vttered; bring me to the Test
And makes as healthfull Musicke. It is not madnesse
My Pulse as yours doth temperately keepe time,
   Ham. Extasie?

This bodilesse Creation extasie is very cunning in
  Qu. This is the very coynage of your Braine,

Enter.
Looke where he goes euen now out at the Portall.
My Father in his habite, as he liued,
   Ham. Why look you there: looke how it steals away:

  Qu. No, nothing but our selues
   Ham. Nor did you nothing heare?

  Qu. Nothing at all, yet all that is I see
  Ham. Do you see nothing there?
   Qu. To who do you speake this?

Will want true colour; teares perchance for blood
My sterne effects: then what I haue to do,
Least with this pitteous action you conuert
Would make them capeable. Do not looke vpon me,
His forme and cause conioyn'd, preaching to stones,
  Ham. On him, on him: look you how pale he glares,
Sprinkle coole patience. Whereon do you looke?
Vpon the heate and flame of thy distemper
Start vp, and stand an end. Oh gentle Sonne,
Your bedded haire, like life in excrements,
And as the sleeping Soldiours in th' Alarme,
Forth at your eyes, your spirits wildely peepe,
And with their corporall ayre do hold discourse.
That you bend your eye on vacancie,
  Qu. Alas, how is't with you?
   Ham. How is it with you Lady?

Speake to her Hamlet
Conceit in weakest bodies, strongest workes.
O step betweene her, and her fighting Soule,
But looke, Amazement on thy Mother sits;
Is but to whet thy almost blunted purpose.
   Ghost. Do not forget: this Visitation

Th' important acting of your dread command? Oh say
That laps't in Time and Passion, lets go by
   Ham. Do you not come your tardy Sonne to chide,

  Qu. Alas he's mad
You heauenly Guards. What would your gracious figure?
Saue me; and houer o're me with your wings
  Ham. A King of shreds and patches.

Enter Ghost.
   Qu. No more.

And put it in his Pocket
That from a shelfe, the precious Diadem stole,
A Cutpurse of the Empire and the Rule.
Of your precedent Lord. A vice of Kings,
A Slaue, that is not twentieth part the tythe
   Ham. A Murderer, and a Villaine:

No more sweet Hamlet
These words like Daggers enter in mine eares.
   Qu. Oh speake to me, no more,

Ouer the nasty Stye
Stew'd in Corruption; honying and making loue
In the ranke sweat of an enseamed bed,
   Ham. Nay, but to liue

As will not leaue their Tinct
And there I see such blacke and grained spots,
Thou turn'st mine eyes into my very soule,
   Qu. O Hamlet, speake no more.

As Reason panders Will
Since Frost it selfe, as actiuely doth burne,
When the compulsiue Ardure giues the charge,
And melt in her owne fire. Proclaime no shame,
To flaming youth, let Vertue be as waxe.
If thou canst mutine in a Matrons bones,
O Shame! where is thy Blush? Rebellious Hell,
That thus hath cousend you at hoodman-blinde?
Would step from this, to this? What diuell was't,
And waites vpon the Iudgement: and what Iudgement
The hey-day in the blood is tame, it's humble,
You cannot call it Loue: For at your age,
And batten on this Moore? Ha? Haue you eyes?
Could you on this faire Mountaine leaue to feed,
Blasting his wholsom breath. Haue you eyes?
Heere is your Husband, like a Mildew'd eare
This was your Husband. Looke you now what followes.
To giue the world assurance of a man.
Where euery God did seeme to set his Seale,
A Combination, and a forme indeed,
New lighted on a heauen-kissing hill:
A Station, like the Herald Mercurie
An eye like Mars, to threaten or command
Hyperions curles, the front of Ioue himselfe,
See what a grace was seated on his Brow,
The counterfet presentment of two Brothers:
   Ham. Looke heere vpon this Picture, and on this,

in the Index
   Qu. Aye me; what act, that roares so lowd, & thunders

Is thought-sicke at the act
With tristfull visage as against the doome,
Yea this solidity and compound masse,
A rapsidie of words. Heauens face doth glow,
The very soule, and sweete Religion makes
As from the body of Contraction pluckes
As false as Dicers Oathes. Oh such a deed,
And makes a blister there. Makes marriage vowes
From the faire forehead of an innocent loue,
Cals Vertue Hypocrite, takes off the Rose
That blurres the grace and blush of Modestie,
  Ham. Such an Act
In noise so rude against me?
   Qu. What haue I done, that thou dar'st wag thy tong,

That it is proofe and bulwarke against Sense
If damned Custome haue not braz'd it so,
If it be made of penetrable stuffe;
And let me wring your heart, for so I shall
Leaue wringing of your hands, peace, sit you downe,
Thou find'st to be too busie, is some danger.
I tooke thee for thy Betters, take thy Fortune,
Thou wretched, rash, intruding foole farewell,
  Ham. I Lady, 'twas my word.
   Qu. As kill a King?

As kill a King, and marrie with his Brother
  Ham. A bloody deed, almost as bad good Mother,
  Qu. Oh what a rash, and bloody deed is this?
  Ham. Nay I know not, is it the King?
   Qu. Oh me, what hast thou done?

Killes Polonius

   Pol. Oh I am slaine.

   Ham. How now, a Rat? dead for a Ducate, dead

   Pol. What hoa, helpe, helpe, helpe

Helpe, helpe, hoa
  Qu. What wilt thou do? thou wilt not murther me?
Where you may see the inmost part of you?
You go not till I set you vp a glasse,
boudge:
   Ham. Come, come, and sit you downe, you shall not

   Qu. Nay, then Ile set those to you that can speake

But would you were not so. You are my Mother
You are the Queene, your Husbands Brothers wife,
  Ham. No by the Rood, not so:
  Qu. Haue you forgot me?
  Ham. Whats the matter now?
   Qu. Why how now Hamlet?

   Ham. Go, go, you question with an idle tongue

   Qu. Come, come, you answer with an idle tongue

   Ham. Mother, you haue my Father much offended


  Qu. Hamlet, thou hast thy Father much offended
  Ham. Now Mother, what's the matter?

Enter Hamlet.
Withdraw, I heare him coming.
   Qu. Ile warrant you, feare me not.

   Ham. within. Mother, mother, mother

Pray you be round with him
Much heate, and him. Ile silence me e'ene heere:
And that your Grace hath screen'd, and stoode betweene
Tell him his prankes haue been too broad to beare with,
Looke you lay home to him,
  Pol. He will come straight:

Enter Queene and Polonius.

Enter.
Words without thoughts, neuer to Heauen go.
  King. My words flye vp, my thoughts remain below,

Enter.
This Physicke but prolongs thy sickly dayes.
As Hell, whereto it goes. My Mother stayes,
And that his Soule may be as damn'd and blacke
Then trip him, that his heeles may kicke at Heauen,
That ha's no rellish of Saluation in't,
At gaming, swearing, or about some acte
Or in th' incestuous pleasure of his bed,
When he is drunke asleepe: or in his Rage,
Vp Sword, and know thou a more horrid hent
When he is fit and season'd for his passage? No.
To take him in the purging of his Soule,
'Tis heauie with him: and am I then reueng'd,
But in our circumstance and course of thought
And how his Audit stands, who knowes, saue Heauen:
With all his Crimes broad blowne, as fresh as May,
He tooke my Father grossely, full of bread,
To heauen. Oh this is hyre and Sallery, not Reuenge.
I his foule Sonne, do this same Villaine send
A Villaine killes my Father, and for that
And so am I reueng'd: that would be scann'd,
And now Ile doo't, and so he goes to Heauen,
  Ham. Now might I do it pat, now he is praying,

Enter Hamlet.
All may be well.
Be soft as sinewes of the new-borne Babe,
Bow stubborne knees, and heart with strings of Steele,
Art more ingag'd: Helpe Angels, make assay:
Oh limed soule, that strugling to be free,
Oh wretched state! Oh bosome, blacke as death!
Yet what can it, when one cannot repent?
Try what Repentance can. What can it not?
To giue in euidence. What then? What rests?
Euen to the teeth and forehead of our faults,
In his true Nature, and we our selues compell'd
There is no shuffling, there the Action lyes
Buyes out the Law; but 'tis not so aboue,
And oft 'tis seene, the wicked prize it selfe
Offences gilded hand may shoue by Iustice,
In the corrupted currants of this world,
May one be pardon'd, and retaine th' offence?
My Crowne, mine owne Ambition, and my Queene:
Of those effects for which I did the Murther.
That cannot be, since I am still possest
Can serue my turne? Forgiue me my foule Murther:
My fault is past. But oh, what forme of Prayer
Or pardon'd being downe? Then Ile looke vp,
To be fore-stalled ere we come to fall,
And what's in Prayer, but this two-fold force,
But to confront the visage of Offence?
To wash it white as Snow? Whereto serues mercy,
Is there not Raine enough in the sweet Heauens
Were thicker then it selfe with Brothers blood,
And both neglect; what if this cursed hand
I stand in pause where I shall first begin,
And like a man to double businesse bound,
My stronger guilt, defeats my strong intent,
Though inclination be as sharpe as will:
A Brothers murther. Pray can I not,
It hath the primall eldest curse vpon't,
Oh my offence is ranke, it smels to heauen,
   King. Thankes deere my Lord.

And tell you what I know
Ile call vpon you ere you go to bed,
The speech of vantage. Fare you well my Liege,
Since Nature makes them partiall, should o're-heare
'Tis meete that some more audience then a Mother,
And as you said, and wisely was it said,
To heare the Processe. Ile warrant shee'l tax him home,
Behinde the Arras Ile conuey my selfe
  Pol. My Lord, he's going to his Mothers Closset:

Enter Polonius.

Exeunt. Gent.

   Both. We will haste vs.

Which now goes too free-footed
For we will Fetters put vpon this feare,
   King. Arme you, I pray you to this speedie Voyage;

Did the King sighe, but with a generall grone
Attends the boystrous Ruine. Neuer alone
Each small annexment, pettie consequence
Are mortiz'd and adioyn'd: which when it falles,
To whose huge Spoakes, ten thousand lesser things
Fixt on the Somnet of the highest Mount.
What's neere it, with it. It is a massie wheele
Dies not alone; but like a Gulfe doth draw
The liues of many, the cease of Maiestie
That Spirit, vpon whose spirit depends and rests
To keepe it selfe from noyance: but much more,
With all the strength and Armour of the minde,
And peculiar life is bound
   Rosin. The single

That liue and feede vpon your Maiestie
To keepe those many many bodies safe
Most holie and Religious feare it is
   Guild. We will our selues prouide:

Out of his Lunacies
Hazard so dangerous as doth hourely grow
The termes of our estate, may not endure
And he to England shall along with you:
I your Commission will forthwith dispatch,
To let his madnesse range. Therefore prepare you,
  King. I like him not, nor stands it safe with vs,

Enter King, Rosincrance, and Guildensterne.
To giue them Seales, neuer my Soule consent.
How in my words someuer she be shent,
My Tongue and Soule in this be Hypocrites.
I will speake Daggers to her, but vse none:
Let me be cruell, not vnnaturall,
The Soule of Nero, enter this firme bosome:
Oh Heart, loose not thy Nature; let not euer
Would quake to looke on. Soft now, to my Mother:
And do such bitter businesse as the day
Contagion to this world. Now could I drink hot blood,
When Churchyards yawne, and Hell it selfe breaths out
'Tis now the verie witching time of night,
  Ham. By and by, is easily said. Leaue me Friends:

Enter.
   Polon. I will say so.

I will come by and by
They foole me to the top of my bent.
   Ham. Then will I come to my Mother, by and by:

  Polon. Verie like a Whale
   Ham. Or like a Whale?

   Polon. It is back'd like a Weazell

   Ham. Me thinkes it is like a Weazell

   Polon. By'th' Masse, and it's like a Camell indeed

like a Camell
   Ham. Do you see that Clowd? that's almost in shape

and presently
  Polon. My Lord; the Queene would speak with you,

Enter Polonius.
blesse you Sir.
though you can fret me, you cannot play vpon me. God
plaid on, then a Pipe? Call me what Instrument you will,
you make it. Why do you thinke, that I am easier to bee
excellent Voice, in this little Organe, yet cannot
Note, to the top of my Compasse: and there is much Musicke,
of my Mysterie; you would sound mee from my lowest
seeme to know my stops: you would pluck out the heart
you make of me: you would play vpon mee; you would
   Ham. Why looke you now, how vnworthy a thing

of hermony, I haue not the skill
   Guild. But these cannot I command to any vtterance

Looke you, these are the stoppes
mouth, and it will discourse most excellent Musicke.
with your finger and thumbe, giue it breath with your
   Ham. 'Tis as easie as lying: gouerne these Ventiges

   Guild. I know no touch of it, my Lord

   Ham. I do beseech you

   Guild. Beleeue me, I cannot

   Ham. I pray you

  Guild. My Lord, I cannot
vpon this Pipe?
   Ham. I do not well vnderstand that. Will you play

is too vnmannerly
  Guild. O my Lord, if my Dutie be too bold, my loue
would driue me into a toyle?
do you go about to recouer the winde of mee, as if you
O the Recorder. Let me see, to withdraw with you, why

Enter one with a Recorder.
something musty.
  Ham. I, but while the grasse growes, the Prouerbe is
the King himselfe, for your Succession in Denmarke?
   Rosin. How can that be, when you haue the voyce of

   Ham. Sir I lacke Aduancement

if you deny your greefes to your Friend
You do freely barre the doore of your owne Libertie,
   Rosin. Good my Lord, what is your cause of distemper?

   Ham. So I do still, by these pickers and stealers

  Rosin. My Lord, you once did loue me
Haue you any further Trade with vs?
   Ham. We shall obey, were she ten times our Mother.

ere you go to bed
  Rosin. She desires to speake with you in her Closset,
admiration?
Mother. But is there no sequell at the heeles of this Mothers
   Ham. Oh wonderfull Sonne, that can so astonish a

her into amazement, and admiration
   Rosin. Then thus she sayes: your behauior hath stroke

but to the matter. My Mother you say
or rather you say, my Mother: therfore no more
But sir, such answers as I can make, you shal command:
  Ham. Make you a wholsome answere: my wits diseas'd.
   Guild. What, my Lord?

   Ham. Sir, I cannot

my Businesse
if not, your pardon, and my returne shall bee the end of
answer, I will doe your Mothers command'ment:
the right breed. If it shall please you to make me a wholsome
   Guild. Nay, good my Lord, this courtesie is not of

   Ham. You are welcome

of spirit, hath sent me to you
   Guild. The Queene your Mother, in most great affliction

   Ham. I am tame Sir, pronounce

frame, and start not so wildely from my affayre
   Guild. Good my Lord put your discourse into some

more Choller
to his Purgation, would perhaps plundge him into farre
to signifie this to his Doctor: for for me to put him
   Ham. Your wisedome should shew it selfe more richer,

  Guild. No my Lord, rather with choller
   Ham. With drinke Sir?

  Guild. Is in his retyrement, maruellous distemper'd
   Ham. I sir, what of him?

   Guild. The King, sir

   Ham. Sir, a whole History

   Guild. Good my Lord, vouchsafe me a word with you

Come some Musicke
Why then belike he likes it not perdie.
For if the King like not the Comedie,
  Ham. Oh, ha? Come some Musick. Come y Recorders:

Enter Rosincrance and Guildensterne.
  Hora. I did verie well note him.
   Ham. Vpon the talke of the poysoning?

  Hora. Verie well my Lord
a thousand pound. Did'st perceiue?
   Ham. Oh good Horatio, Ile take the Ghosts word for

   Hora. You might haue Rim'd

A verie verie Paiocke
And now reignes heere.
This Realme dismantled was of Ioue himselfe,
For thou dost know: Oh Damon deere,
   Ham. A whole one I,

   Hor. Halfe a share

of Players sir
Roses on my rac'd Shooes, get me a Fellowship in a crie
my Fortunes turne Turke with me; with two Prouinciall
Would not this Sir, and a Forrest of Feathers, if the rest of
So runnes the world away.
For some must watch, while some must sleepe;
The Hart vngalled play:
  Ham. Why let the strucken Deere go weepe,

Manet Hamlet & Horatio.

Exeunt.

   All. Lights, Lights, Lights.

   King. Giue me some Light. Away

  Pol. Giue o're the Play
   Qu. How fares my Lord?

   Ham. What, frighted with false fire

   Ophe. The King rises

loue of Gonzago's wife
Italian. You shall see anon how the Murtherer gets the
name's Gonzago: the Story is extant and writ in choyce
  Ham. He poysons him i'th' Garden for's estate: His

Powres the poyson in his eares.

On wholsome life, vsurpe immediately.
Thy naturall Magicke, and dire propertie,
With Hecats Ban, thrice blasted, thrice infected,
Thou mixture ranke, of Midnight Weeds collected,
Confederate season, else, no Creature seeing:
Drugges fit, and Time agreeing:
   Lucian. Thoughts blacke, hands apt,

begin. Come, the croaking Rauen doth bellow for Reuenge
Begin Murderer. Pox, leaue thy damnable Faces, and
   Ham. So you mistake Husbands.

   Ophe. Still better and worse

edge
   Ham. It would cost you a groaning, to take off my

   Ophe. You are keene my Lord, you are keene

if I could see the Puppets dallying
   Ham. I could interpret betweene you and your loue:

   Ophe. You are a good Chorus, my Lord

This is one Lucianus nephew to the King

Enter Lucianus.
vs not: let the gall'd iade winch: our withers are vnrung.
Your Maiestie, and wee that haue free soules, it touches
anon: 'tis a knauish peece of worke: But what o'that?
is the Dukes name, his wife Baptista: you shall see
This Play is the Image of a murder done in Vienna: Gonzago
  Ham. The Mouse-trap: Marry how? Tropically:
   King. What do you call the Play?

i'th' world
  Ham. No, no, they do but iest, poyson in iest, no Offence
in't?
   King. Haue you heard the Argument, is there no Offence

   Ham. Oh but shee'l keepe her word

  Qu. The Lady protests to much me thinkes
  Ham. Madam, how like you this Play?

Exit

And neuer come mischance betweene vs twaine.

Sleepes

   Qu. Sleepe rocke thy Braine,

The tedious day with sleepe
My spirits grow dull, and faine I would beguile
Sweet, leaue me heere a while,
   King. 'Tis deepely sworne:

   Ham. If she should breake it now

If once a Widdow, euer I be Wife
Both heere, and hence, pursue me lasting strife,
Meet what I would haue well, and it destroy:
Each opposite that blankes the face of ioy,
Sport and repose locke from me day and night:
   Bap. Nor Earth to giue me food, nor Heauen light,

But die thy thoughts, when thy first Lord is dead
So thinke thou wilt no second Husband wed.
Our thoughts are ours, their ends none of our owne.
That our Deuices still are ouerthrowne,
Our Willes and Fates do so contrary run,
But orderly to end, where I begun,
Directly seasons him his Enemie.
And who in want a hollow Friend doth try,
For who not needs, shall neuer lacke a Frend:
And hitherto doth Loue on Fortune tend,
The poore aduanc'd, makes Friends of Enemies:
The great man downe, you marke his fauourites flies,
Whether Loue lead Fortune, or else Fortune Loue.
For 'tis a question left vs yet to proue,
That euen our Loues should with our Fortunes change.
This world is not for aye, nor 'tis not strange
Greefe ioyes, Ioy greeues on slender accident.
Where Ioy most Reuels, Greefe doth most lament;
Their owne ennactors with themselues destroy:
The violence of other Greefe or Ioy,
The passion ending, doth the purpose lose.
What to our selues in passion we propose,
To pay our selues, what to our selues is debt:
Most necessary 'tis, that we forget
But fall vnshaken, when they mellow bee.
Which now like Fruite vnripe stickes on the Tree,
Of violent Birth, but poore validitie:
Purpose is but the slaue to Memorie,
But what we do determine, oft we breake:
   King. I do beleeue you. Think what now you speak:

When second Husband kisses me in Bed
A second time, I kill my Husband dead,
Are base respects of Thrift, but none of Loue.
   Bapt. The instances that second Marriage moue,

   Ham. Wormwood, Wormwood

None wed the second, but who kill'd the first
In second Husband, let me be accurst,
Such Loue, must needs be Treason in my brest:
  Bap. Oh confound the rest:
For Husband shalt thou-
Honour'd, belou'd, and haply, one as kinde.
And thou shalt liue in this faire world behinde,
My operant Powers my Functions leaue to do:
   King. Faith I must leaue thee Loue, and shortly too:

And as my Loue is siz'd, my Feare is so
Now what my loue is, proofe hath made you know,
In neither ought, or in extremity:
For womens Feare and Loue, holds quantitie,
Discomfort you (my Lord) it nothing must:
That I distrust you: yet though I distrust,
So farre from cheere, and from your former state,
But woe is me, you are so sicke of late,
Make vs againe count o're, ere loue be done.
   Bap. So many iournies may the Sunne and Moone

Vnite comutuall, in most sacred Bands
Since loue our hearts, and Hymen did our hands
About the World haue times twelue thirties beene,
And thirtie dozen Moones with borrowed sheene,
Neptunes salt Wash, and Tellus Orbed ground:
  King. Full thirtie times hath Phoebus Cart gon round,

Enter King and his Queene.
   Ham. As Womans loue.

  Ophe. 'Tis briefe my Lord
   Ham. Is this a Prologue, or the Poesie of a Ring?

We begge your hearing Patientlie
Heere stooping to your Clemencie:
For vs, and for our Tragedie,

Enter Prologue.
Play.
   Ophe. You are naught, you are naught, Ile marke the

meanes
you asham'd to shew, hee'l not shame to tell you what it
  Ham. I, or any shew that you'l shew him. Bee not
   Ophe. Will they tell vs what this shew meant?

cannot keepe counsell, they'l tell all
  Ham. We shall know by these Fellowes: the Players
Play?
   Ophe. Belike this shew imports the Argument of the

Mischeefe
  Ham. Marry this is Miching Malicho, that meanes
  Ophe. What meanes this, my Lord?

Exeunt.

loue.
accepts his
Gifts, she seemes loath and vnwilling awhile, but in the end,
Queene with
with her. The dead body is carried away: The Poysoner Wooes the
to lament
Poysoner, with some two or three Mutes comes in againe, seeming
Action. The
Queene returnes, findes the King dead, and makes passionate
Exits. The
Crowne, kisses it, and powres poyson in the Kings eares, and
takes off his
She seeing him a-sleepe, leaues him. Anon comes in a Fellow,
of Flowers.
declines his head vpon her neck. Layes him downe vpon a Banke
vp, and
kneeles, and makes shew of Protestation vnto him. He takes her
him. She
Enter a King and Queene, very louingly; the Queene embracing

Hoboyes play. The dumbe shew enters.

Epitaph is, For o, For o, the Hoby-horse is forgot.
he suffer not thinking on, with the Hoby-horsse, whose
But byrlady he must builde Churches then: or else shall
great mans Memorie, may out-liue his life halfe a yeare:
ago, and not forgotten yet? Then there's hope, a
for Ile haue a suite of Sables. Oh Heauens! dye two moneths
   Ham. So long? Nay then let the Diuel weare blacke,

   Ophe. Nay, 'tis twice two moneths, my Lord

Houres
my Mother lookes, and my Father dyed within's two
a man do, but be merrie. For looke you how cheerefully
   Ham. Oh God, your onely Iigge-maker: what should

  Ophe. I my Lord
  Ham. Who I?
   Ophe. You are merrie, my Lord?

  Ham. Nothing
  Ophe. What is my Lord?
   Ham. That's a faire thought to ly betweene Maids legs

  Ophe. I thinke nothing, my Lord
   Ham. Do you thinke I meant Country matters?

  Ophe. I my Lord
   Ham. I meane, my Head vpon your Lap?

  Ophe. No my Lord
  Ham. Ladie, shall I lye in your Lap?
   Pol. Oh ho, do you marke that?

   Ha. No good Mother, here's Mettle more attractiue

   Qu. Come hither my good Hamlet, sit by me

  Rosin. I my Lord, they stay vpon your patience
Calfe there. Be the Players ready?
   Ham. It was a bruite part of him, to kill so Capitall a

Brutus kill'd me
  Pol. I did enact Iulius Caesar, I was kill'd i'th' Capitol:
   Ham. And what did you enact?

Actor
  Polon. That I did my Lord, and was accounted a good
i'th' Vniuersity, you say?
   Ham. No, nor mine. Now my Lord, you plaid once

words are not mine
   King. I haue nothing with this answer Hamlet, these

the Ayre promise-cramm'd, you cannot feed Capons so
  Ham. Excellent Ifaith, of the Camelions dish: I eate
   King. How fares our Cosin Hamlet?

Get you a place
  Ham. They are comming to the Play: I must be idle.

a Flourish.
March. Sound
other Lords attendant with his Guard carrying Torches. Danish
Guildensterne, and
Enter King, Queene, Polonius, Ophelia, Rosincrance,
And scape detecting, I will pay the Theft.
If he steale ought the whil'st this Play is Playing,
   Hora. Well my Lord.

To censure of his seeming
And after we will both our iudgements ioyne,
For I mine eyes will riuet to his Face:
As Vulcans Stythe. Giue him needfull note,
And my Imaginations are as foule
It is a damned Ghost that we haue seene:
Do not it selfe vnkennell in one speech,
Obserue mine Vnkle: If his occulted guilt,
Euen with the verie Comment of my Soule
I prythee, when thou see'st that Acte a-foot,
Which I haue told thee, of my Fathers death.
One Scoene of it comes neere the Circumstance
There is a Play to night to before the King.
As I do thee. Something too much of this.
In my hearts Core. I, in my Heart of heart,
That is not Passions Slaue, and I will weare him
To sound what stop she please. Giue me that man,
That they are not a Pipe for Fortunes finger.
Whose Blood and Iudgement are so well co-mingled,
Hath 'tane with equall Thankes. And blest are those,
A man that Fortunes buffets, and Rewards
As one in suffering all, that suffers nothing.
Hath seal'd thee for her selfe. For thou hast bene
And could of men distinguish, her election
Since my deere Soule was Mistris of my choyse,
Where thrift may follow faining? Dost thou heare,
And crooke the pregnant Hindges of the knee,
No, let the Candied tongue, like absurd pompe,
To feed & cloath thee. Why shold the poor be flatter'd?
That no Reuennew hast, but thy good spirits
For what aduancement may I hope from thee,
   Ham. Nay, do not thinke I flatter:

   Hora. O my deere Lord

As ere my Conuersation coap'd withall
   Ham. Horatio, thou art eene as iust a man

  Hora. Heere sweet Lord, at your Seruice
  Ham. What hoa, Horatio?

Enter Horatio.

Exeunt.

  Both. We will my Lord.
Will you two helpe to hasten them?

Exit Polonius.

   Ham. Bid the Players make hast.

  Pol. And the Queene too, and that presently
Will the King heare this peece of Worke?
How now my Lord,

Enter Polonius, Rosincrance, and Guildensterne.

Exit Players.

it. Go make you readie.
shewes a most pittifull Ambition in the Foole that vses
of the Play be then to be considered: that's Villanous, &
too, though in the meane time, some necessary Question
to set on some quantitie of barren Spectators to laugh
them. For there be of them, that will themselues laugh,
play your Clownes, speake no more then is set downe for
   Ham. O reforme it altogether. And let those that

vs, Sir
   Play. I hope we haue reform'd that indifferently with

and not made them well, they imitated Humanity so abhominably
thought some of Natures Iouerney-men had made men,
or Norman, haue so strutted and bellowed, that I haue
the accent of Christians, nor the gate of Christian, Pagan,
highly (not to speake it prophanely) that neyther hauing
that I haue seene Play, and heard others praise, and that
a whole Theater of Others. Oh, there bee Players
censure of the which One, must in your allowance o'reway
laugh, cannot but make the Iudicious greeue; The
ouer-done, or come tardie off, though it make the vnskilfull
Bodie of the Time, his forme and pressure. Now, this
Feature, Scorne her owne Image, and the verie Age and
the Mirrour vp to Nature; to shew Vertue her owne
end both at the first and now, was and is, to hold as 'twer
thing so ouer-done, is fro[m] the purpose of Playing, whose
That you ore-stop not the modestie of Nature; for any
the Word to the Action, with this speciall obseruance:
Discretion be your Tutor. Sute the Action to the Word,
   Ham. Be not too tame neyther: but let your owne

   Player. I warrant your Honor

outHerod's Herod. Pray you auoid it
haue such a Fellow whipt for o're-doing Termagant: it
nothing, but inexplicable dumbe shewes, & noise: I could
Groundlings: who (for the most part) are capeable of
to tatters, to verie ragges, to split the eares of the
to see a robustious Pery-wig-pated Fellow, teare a Passion
may giue it Smoothnesse. O it offends mee to the Soule,
Passion, you must acquire and beget a Temperance that
Tempest, and (as I say) the Whirle-winde of
your hand thus, but vse all gently; for in the verie Torrent,
had spoke my Lines: Nor do not saw the Ayre too much
as many of your Players do, I had as liue the Town-Cryer
it to you trippingly on the Tongue: But if you mouth it,
  Ham. Speake the Speech I pray you, as I pronounc'd

Enter Hamlet, and two or three of the Players.

Exeunt.

Madnesse in great Ones, must not vnwatch'd go.
   King. It shall be so:

Your wisedome best shall thinke
To England send him: Or confine him where
Of all their Conference. If she finde him not,
And Ile be plac'd so, please you in the eare
To shew his Greefes: let her be round with him,
Let his Queene Mother all alone intreat him
But if you hold it fit after the Play,
We heard it all. My Lord, do as you please,
You neede not tell vs, what Lord Hamlet saide,
Sprung from neglected loue. How now Ophelia?
The Origin and Commencement of this greefe
  Pol. It shall do well. But yet do I beleeue
From fashion of himselfe. What thinke you on't?
Whereon his Braines still beating, puts him thus
This something setled matter in his heart:
With variable Obiects, shall expell
Haply the Seas and Countries different
For the demand of our neglected Tribute:
Thus set it downe. He shall with speed to England
I haue in quicke determination
Will be some danger, which to preuent
And I do doubt the hatch, and the disclose
O're which his Melancholly sits on brood,
Was not like Madnesse. There's something in his soule?
Nor what he spake, though it lack'd Forme a little,
  King. Loue? His affections do not that way tend,

Enter King, and Polonius.
T'haue seene what I haue seene: see what I see.
Blasted with extasie. Oh woe is me,
That vnmatch'd Forme and Feature of blowne youth,
Like sweet Bels iangled out of tune, and harsh,
Now see that Noble, and most Soueraigne Reason,
That suck'd the Honie of his Musicke Vowes:
Haue I of Ladies most deiect and wretched,
Th' obseru'd of all Obseruers, quite, quite downe.
The glasse of Fashion, and the mould of Forme,
Th' expectansie and Rose of the faire State,
The Courtiers, Soldiers, Schollers: Eye, tongue, sword,
  Ophe. O what a Noble minde is heere o're-throwne?

Exit Hamlet.

as they are. To a Nunnery, go.
married already, all but one shall liue, the rest shall keep
I say, we will haue no more Marriages. Those that are
Go too, Ile no more on't, it hath made me mad.
Gods creatures, and make your Wantonnesse, your Ignorance.
you gidge, you amble, and you lispe, and nickname
God has giuen you one pace, and you make your selfe another:
   Ham. I haue heard of your pratlings too wel enough.

   Ophe. O heauenly Powers, restore him

make of them. To a Nunnery go, and quickly too. Farwell
for Wise men know well enough, what monsters you
Go, Farewell. Or if thou wilt needs Marry, marry a fool:
thou shalt not escape Calumny. Get thee to a Nunnery.
for thy Dowrie. Be thou as chast as Ice, as pure as Snow,
   Ham. If thou doest Marry, Ile giue thee this Plague

   Ophe. O helpe him, you sweet Heauens

play the Foole no way, but in's owne house. Farewell
   Ham. Let the doores be shut vpon him, that he may

  Ophe. At home, my Lord
wayes to a Nunnery. Where's your Father?
We are arrant Knaues all, beleeue none of vs. Goe thy
Fellowes as I do, crawling betweene Heauen and Earth.
them shape, or time to acte them in. What should such
then I haue thoughts to put them in imagination, to giue
Ambitious, with more offences at my becke,
my Mother had not borne me. I am very prowd, reuengefull,
but yet I could accuse me of such things, that it were better
be a breeder of Sinners? I am my selfe indifferent honest,
   Ham. Get thee to a Nunnerie. Why would'st thou

   Ophe. I was the more deceiued

of it. I loued you not
cannot so innocculate our old stocke, but we shall rellish
   Ham. You should not haue beleeued me. For vertue

   Ophe. Indeed my Lord, you made me beleeue so

proofe. I did loue you once
This was sometime a Paradox, but now the time giues it
force of Honestie can translate Beautie into his likenesse.
transforme Honestie from what is, to a Bawd, then the
  Ham. I trulie: for the power of Beautie, will sooner
then your Honestie?
   Ophe. Could Beautie my Lord, haue better Comerce

should admit no discourse to your Beautie
  Ham. That if you be honest and faire, your Honesty
  Ophe. What meanes your Lordship?
   Ham. Are you faire?

  Ophe. My Lord
   Ham. Ha, ha: Are you honest?

There my Lord
Rich gifts wax poore, when giuers proue vnkinde.
Take these againe, for to the Noble minde
As made the things more rich, then perfume left:
And with them words of so sweet breath compos'd,
   Ophe. My honor'd Lord, I know right well you did,

   Ham. No, no, I neuer gaue you ought

I pray you now, receiue them
That I haue longed long to re-deliuer.
   Ophe. My Lord, I haue Remembrances of yours,

  Ham. I humbly thanke you: well, well, well
How does your Honor for this many a day?
   Ophe. Good my Lord,

Be all my sinnes remembred
The faire Ophelia? Nimph, in thy Orizons
And loose the name of Action. Soft you now,
With this regard their Currants turne away,
And enterprizes of great pith and moment,
Is sicklied o're, with the pale cast of Thought,
And thus the Natiue hew of Resolution
Thus Conscience does make Cowards of vs all,
Then flye to others that we know not of.
And makes vs rather beare those illes we haue,
No Traueller returnes, Puzels the will,
The vndiscouered Countrey, from whose Borne
But that the dread of something after death,
To grunt and sweat vnder a weary life,
With a bare Bodkin? Who would these Fardles beare
When he himselfe might his Quietus make
That patient merit of the vnworthy takes,
The insolence of Office, and the Spurnes
The pangs of dispriz'd Loue, the Lawes delay,
The Oppressors wrong, the poore mans Contumely,
For who would beare the Whips and Scornes of time,
That makes Calamity of so long life:
Must giue vs pawse. There's the respect
When we haue shuffel'd off this mortall coile,
For in that sleepe of death, what dreames may come,
To sleepe, perchance to Dreame; I, there's the rub,
Deuoutly to be wish'd. To dye to sleepe,
That Flesh is heyre too? 'Tis a consummation
The Heart-ake, and the thousand Naturall shockes
No more; and by a sleepe, to say we end
And by opposing end them: to dye, to sleepe
Or to take Armes against a Sea of troubles,
The Slings and Arrowes of outragious Fortune,
Whether 'tis Nobler in the minde to suffer
  Ham. To be, or not to be, that is the Question:

Enter Hamlet.

Exeunt.

  Pol. I heare him comming, let's withdraw my Lord.
Oh heauie burthen!
Then is my deede, to my most painted word.
Is not more vgly to the thing that helpes it,
The Harlots Cheeke beautied with plaist'ring Art
How smart a lash that speech doth giue my Conscience?
   King. Oh 'tis true:

The diuell himselfe
And pious Action, we do surge o're
'Tis too much prou'd, that with Deuotions visage,
Your lonelinesse. We are oft too blame in this,
That shew of such an exercise may colour
We will bestow our selues: Reade on this booke,
   Pol. Ophelia, walke you heere. Gracious so please ye

   Ophe. Madam, I wish it may

To both your Honors
Will bring him to his wonted way againe,
Of Hamlets wildenesse: so shall I hope your Vertues
That your good Beauties be the happy cause
And for your part Ophelia, I do wish
   Qu. I shall obey you,

That thus he suffers for
If't be th' affliction of his loue, or no.
And gather by him, as he is behaued,
We may of their encounter frankely iudge,
Will so bestow our selues, that seeing vnseene
Affront Ophelia. Her Father, and my selfe (lawful espials)
That he, as 'twere by accident, may there
For we haue closely sent for Hamlet hither,
  King. Sweet Gertrude leaue vs too,

Exeunt.

   Rosin. We shall my Lord.

To these delights
Giue him a further edge, and driue his purpose on
To heare him so inclin'd. Good Gentlemen,
   King. With all my heart, and it doth much content me

To heare, and see the matter
And he beseech'd me to intreate your Maiesties
   Pol. 'Tis most true:

This night to play before him
And (as I thinke) they haue already order
To heare of it: They are about the Court,
And there did seeme in him a kinde of ioy
We ore-wrought on the way: of these we told him,
  Rosin. Madam, it so fell out, that certaine Players
   Qu. Did you assay him to any pastime?

Most free in his reply
   Rosin. Niggard of question, but of our demands

   Guild. But with much forcing of his disposition

  Rosin. Most like a Gentleman
   Qu. Did he receiue you well?

Of his true state
When we would bring him on to some Confession
But with a crafty Madnesse keepes aloofe:
   Guil. Nor do we finde him forward to be sounded,

But from what cause he will by no meanes speake
   Rosin. He does confesse he feeles himselfe distracted,

With turbulent and dangerous Lunacy
Grating so harshly all his dayes of quiet
Get from him why he puts on this Confusion:
  King. And can you by no drift of circumstance

Lords.
Guildenstern, and
Enter King, Queene, Polonius, Ophelia, Rosincrance,

Exit

Wherein Ile catch the Conscience of the King.
More Relatiue then this: The Play's the thing,
Abuses me to damne me. Ile haue grounds
As he is very potent with such Spirits,
Out of my Weaknesse, and my Melancholly,
T' assume a pleasing shape, yea and perhaps
May be the Diuell, and the Diuel hath power
I know my course. The Spirit that I haue seene
Ile rent him to the quicke: If he but blench
Before mine Vnkle. Ile obserue his lookes,
Play something like the murder of my Father,
With most myraculous Organ. Ile haue these Players,
For Murther, though it haue no tongue, will speake
They haue proclaim'd their Malefactions.
Bene strooke so to the soule, that presently
Haue by the very cunning of the Scoene,
I haue heard, that guilty Creatures sitting at a Play,
A Scullion? Fye vpon't: Foh. About my Braine.
And fall a Cursing like a very Drab.
Must (like a Whore) vnpacke my heart with words,
Prompted to my Reuenge by Heauen, and Hell,
That I, the Sonne of the Deere murthered,
Who? What an Asse am I? I sure, this is most braue,
Oh Vengeance!
Remorselesse, Treacherous, Letcherous, kindles villaine!
With this Slaues Offall, bloudy: a Bawdy villaine,
I should haue fatted all the Region Kites
To make Oppression bitter, or ere this,
But I am Pigeon-Liuer'd, and lacke Gall
Ha? Why I should take it: for it cannot be,
As deepe as to the Lungs? Who does me this?
Tweakes me by'th' Nose? giues me the Lye i'th' Throate,
Pluckes off my Beard, and blowes it in my face?
Who calles me Villaine? breakes my pate a-crosse?
A damn'd defeate was made. Am I a Coward?
Vpon whose property, and most deere life,
And can say nothing: No, not for a King,
Like Iohn a-dreames, vnpregnant of my cause,
A dull and muddy-metled Rascall, peake
The very faculty of Eyes and Eares. Yet I,
Confound the ignorant, and amaze indeed,
Make mad the guilty, and apale the free,
And cleaue the generall eare with horrid speech:
That I haue? He would drowne the Stage with teares,
Had he the Motiue and the Cue for passion
That he should weepe for her? What would he doe,
What's Hecuba to him, or he to Hecuba,
For Hecuba?
With Formes, to his Conceit? And all for nothing?
A broken voyce, and his whole Function suiting
Teares in his eyes, distraction in's Aspect,
That from her working, all his visage warm'd;
Could force his soule so to his whole conceit,
But in a Fixion, in a dreame of Passion,
Is it not monstrous that this Player heere,
Oh what a Rogue and Pesant slaue am I?
  Ham. I so, God buy'ye: Now I am alone.

Manet Hamlet.

Exeunt.

  Rosin. Good my Lord.
you are welcome to Elsonower?
mock him not. My good Friends, Ile leaue you til night
   Ham. Very well. Follow that Lord, and looke you

  Play. I my Lord
I would set downe, and insert in't? Could ye not?
need study a speech of some dosen or sixteene lines, which
   Ham. Wee'l ha't to morrow night. You could for a

  Play. I my Lord
murther of Gonzago?
Dost thou heare me old Friend, can you play the
  Ham. Follow him Friends: wee'l heare a play to morrow.

Exit Polon.

   Pol. Come sirs.

in
deserue, the more merit is in your bountie. Take them
them after your own Honor and Dignity. The lesse they
after his desart, and who should scape whipping: vse
   Ham. Gods bodykins man, better. Vse euerie man

   Pol. My Lord, I will vse them according to their desart

their ill report while you liued
your death, you were better haue a bad Epitaph, then
the Abstracts and breefe Chronicles of the time. After
Do ye heare, let them be well vs'd: for they are
soone. Good my Lord, will you see the Players wel bestow'd.
   Ham. 'Tis well, Ile haue thee speake out the rest,

ha's teares in's eyes. Pray you no more
   Pol. Looke where he ha's not turn'd his colour, and

And passion in the Gods
Would haue made milche the Burning eyes of Heauen,
(Vnlesse things mortall moue them not at all)
The instant Burst of Clamour that she made
In mincing with his Sword her Husbands limbes,
When she saw Pyrrhus make malicious sport
But if the Gods themselues did see her then,
'Gainst Fortunes State, would Treason haue pronounc'd?
Who this had seene, with tongue in Venome steep'd,
A blanket in th' Alarum of feare caught vp.
About her lanke and all ore-teamed Loines,
Where late the Diadem stood, and for a Robe
With Bisson Rheume: A clout about that head,
Threatning the flame
   1.Play. Run bare-foot vp and downe,

  Pol. That's good: Inobled Queene is good
   Ham. The inobled Queene?

   1.Play. But who, O who, had seen the inobled Queen

sleepes. Say on; come to Hecuba
say on: He's for a Iigge, or a tale of Baudry, or hee
   Ham. It shall to'th Barbars, with your beard. Prythee

   Pol. This is too long

As low as to the Fiends
And boule the round Naue downe the hill of Heauen,
Breake all the Spokes and Fallies from her wheele,
In generall Synod take away her power:
Out, out, thou Strumpet-Fortune, all you Gods,
Now falles on Priam.
With lesse remorse then Pyrrhus bleeding sword
On Mars his Armours, forg'd for proofe Eterne,
And neuer did the Cyclops hammers fall
A rowsed Vengeance sets him new a-worke,
Doth rend the Region. So after Pyrrhus pause,
As hush as death: Anon the dreadfull Thunder
The bold windes speechlesse, and the Orbe below
A silence in the Heauens, the Racke stand still,
But as we often see against some storme,
And like a Newtrall to his will and matter, did nothing.
So as a painted Tyrant Pyrrhus stood,
Of Reuerend Priam, seem'd i'th' Ayre to sticke:
Which was declining on the Milkie head
Takes Prisoner Pyrrhus eare. For loe, his Sword
Stoopes to his Bace, and with a hideous crash
Seeming to feele his blow, with flaming top
Th' vnnerued Father fals. Then senselesse Illium,
But with the whiffe and winde of his fell Sword,
Pyrrhus at Priam driues, in Rage strikes wide:
Repugnant to command: vnequall match,
Rebellious to his Arme, lyes where it falles
Striking too short at Greekes. His anticke Sword,
   1.Player. Anon he findes him,

and good discretion
   Pol. Fore God, my Lord, well spoken, with good accent,

Olde Grandsire Priam seekes
With eyes like Carbuncles, the hellish Pyrrhus
And thus o're-sized with coagulate gore,
To their vilde Murthers, roasted in wrath and fire,
That lend a tyrannous, and damned light
Bak'd and impasted with the parching streets,
With blood of Fathers, Mothers, Daughters, Sonnes,
Now is he to take Geulles, horridly Trick'd
With Heraldry more dismall: Head to foote
Hath now this dread and blacke Complexion smear'd
When he lay couched in the Ominous Horse,
Blacke as his purpose, did the night resemble
The rugged Pyrrhus, he whose Sable Armes
th'Hyrcanian Beast. It is not so: it begins with Pyrrhus
this Line, let me see, let me see: The rugged Pyrrhus like
of Priams slaughter. If it liue in your memory, begin at
to Dido, and thereabout of it especially, where he speaks
cheefe Speech in it, I cheefely lou'd, 'twas Aeneas Tale
Author of affectation, but cal'd it an honest method. One
nor no matter in the phrase, that might indite the
there was no Sallets in the lines, to make the matter sauory;
with as much modestie, as cunning. I remember one said,
excellent Play; well digested in the Scoenes, set downe
iudgement in such matters, cried in the top of mine) an
Generall: but it was (as I receiu'd it, and others, whose
remember pleas'd not the Million, 'twas Cauiarie to the
neuer Acted: or if it was, not aboue once, for the Play I
  Ham. I heard thee speak me a speech once, but it was
   1.Play. What speech, my Lord?

come, a passionate speech
haue a Speech straight. Come giue vs a tast of your quality:
to't like French Faulconers, flie at any thing we see: wee'l
within the ring. Masters, you are all welcome: wee'l e'ne
your voice like a peece of vncurrant Gold be not crack'd
I saw you last, by the altitude of a Choppine. Pray God
Byrlady your Ladiship is neerer Heauen then when
beard me in Denmarke? What, my yong Lady and Mistris?
Thy face is valiant since I saw thee last: Com'st thou to
thee well: Welcome good Friends. Oh my olde Friend?
Y'are welcome Masters, welcome all. I am glad to see

Enter foure or fiue Players.
Abridgements come.
Pons Chanson will shew you more. For looke where my
came to passe, as most like it was: The first rowe of the
  Ha. Why, As by lot, God wot: and then you know, It
   Polon. What followes then, my Lord?

   Ham. Nay that followes not

that I loue passing well
  Polon. If you call me Iephta my Lord, I haue a daughter
   Ham. Am I not i'th' right old Iephta?

   Pol. Still on my Daughter

The which he loued passing well
  Ham. Why one faire Daughter, and no more,
  Pol. What a Treasure had he, my Lord?
thou?
   Ham. O Iephta Iudge of Israel, what a Treasure had'st

the onely men
too light, for the law of Writ, and the Liberty. These are
vnlimited. Seneca cannot be too heauy, nor Plautus
Scene indiuidible: or Poem
Tragicall-Historicall: Tragicall-Comicall-Historicall-Pastorall:
Pastoricall-Comicall-Historicall-Pastorall:
Comedie, Historie, Pastorall:
  Polon. The best Actors in the world, either for Tragedie,
   Ham. Then can each Actor on his Asse-

   Pol. Vpon mine Honor

   Ham. Buzze, buzze

  Pol. The Actors are come hither my Lord
When Rossius an Actor in Rome-
   Ham. My Lord, I haue Newes to tell you.

   Pol. My Lord, I haue Newes to tell you

'twas so indeed
Players. Mark it, you say right Sir: for a Monday morning
   Ham. I will Prophesie. Hee comes to tell me of the

they say, an old man is twice a childe
   Rosin. Happily he's the second time come to them: for

out of his swathing clouts
eare a hearer: that great Baby you see there, is not yet
   Ham. Hearke you Guildensterne, and you too: at each

  Pol. Well be with you Gentlemen

Enter Polonius.
Winde is Southerly, I know a Hawke from a Handsaw.
  Ham. I am but mad North, North-West: when the
   Guil. In what my deere Lord?

and Aunt Mother are deceiu'd
then yours. You are welcome: but my Vnckle Father,
fairely outward) should more appeare like entertainment
lest my extent to the Players (which I tell you must shew
and Ceremony. Let me comply with you in the Garbe,
hands, come: The appurtenance of Welcome, is Fashion
   Ham. Gentlemen, you are welcom to Elsonower: your

  Guil. There are the Players

Flourish for the Players.

finde it out.
in this more then Naturall, if Philosophie could
Ducates a peece, for his picture in Little. There is something
while my Father liued; giue twenty, forty, an hundred
Denmarke, and those that would make mowes at him
   Ham. It is not strange: for mine Vnckle is King of

  Rosin. I that they do my Lord. Hercules & his load too
   Ham. Do the Boyes carry it away?

Braines
  Guild. Oh there ha's beene much throwing about of
   Ham. Is't possible?

the Question
vnlesse the Poet and the Player went to Cuffes in
There was for a while, no mony bid for argument,
and the Nation holds it no sinne, to tarre them to Controuersie.
   Rosin. Faith there ha's bene much to do on both sides:

owne Succession
do them wrong, to make them exclaim against their
it is most like if their meanes are not better) their Writers
if they should grow themselues to common Players (as
longer then they can sing? Will they not say afterwards
How are they escorted? Will they pursue the Quality no
   Ham. What are they Children? Who maintains 'em?

Goose-quils, and dare scarse come thither
call them) that many wearing Rapiers, are affraide of
fashion, and so be-ratled the common Stages (so they
are most tyrannically clap't for't: these are now the
Yases, that crye out on the top of question; and
pace; But there is Sir an ayrie of Children, little
  Rosin. Nay, their indeauour keepes in the wonted
   Ham. How comes it? doe they grow rusty?

  Rosin. No indeed, they are not
when I was in the City? Are they so follow'd?
  Ham. Doe they hold the same estimation they did
of the late Innouation?
   Rosin. I thinke their Inhibition comes by the meanes

wayes
both in reputation and profit was better both
   Ham. How chances it they trauaile? their residence

the Tragedians of the City
  Rosin. Euen those you were wont to take delight in
are they?
freely; or the blanke Verse shall halt for't: what Players
are tickled a'th' sere: and the Lady shall say her minde
peace: the Clowne shall make those laugh whose lungs
not sigh gratis, the humorous man shall end his part in
Knight shal vse his Foyle and Target: the Louer shall
Maiesty shall haue Tribute of mee: the aduenturous
   Ham. He that playes the King shall be welcome; his

they comming to offer you Seruice
from you: wee coated them on the way, and hither are
what Lenton entertainment the Players shall receiue
  Rosin. To thinke, my Lord, if you delight not in Man,
not me?
   Ham. Why did you laugh, when I said, Man delights

thoughts
   Rosin. My Lord, there was no such stuffe in my

to say so
nor Woman neither; though by your smiling you seeme
this Quintessence of Dust? Man delights not me; no,
world, the Parragon of Animals; and yet to me, what is
in apprehension, how like a God? the beauty of the
how expresse and admirable? in Action, how like an Angel?
Reason? how infinite in faculty? in forme and mouing
What a piece of worke is a man! how Noble in
to mee, then a foule and pestilent congregation of vapours.
fretted with golden fire: why, it appeares no other thing
look you, this braue ore-hanging, this Maiesticall Roofe,
Promontory; this most excellent Canopy the Ayre,
that this goodly frame the Earth, seemes to me a sterrill
and indeed, it goes so heauenly with my disposition;
I know not, lost all my mirth, forgone all custome of exercise;
Queene: moult no feather, I haue of late, but wherefore
preuent your discouery of your secricie to the King and
   Ham. I will tell you why; so shall my anticipation

   Guil. My Lord, we were sent for

hold not off
  Ham. Nay then I haue an eye of you: if you loue me
   Rosin. What say you?

were sent for or no
you withall; be euen and direct with me, whether you
and by what more deare, a better proposer could charge
our youth, by the Obligation of our euer-preserued loue,
you by the rights of our fellowship, by the consonancy of
  Ham. That you must teach me: but let mee coniure
   Rosin. To what end my Lord?

I know the good King & Queene haue sent for you
which your modesties haue not craft enough to color,
sent for; and there is a kinde confession in your lookes;
  Ham. Why any thing. But to the purpose; you were
   Guil. What should we say my Lord?

deale iustly with me: come, come; nay speake
your owne inclining? Is it a free visitation? Come,
are too deare a halfepeny; were you not sent for? Is it
but I thanke you: and sure deare friends my thanks
   Ham. Begger that I am, I am euen poore in thankes;

  Rosin. To visit you my Lord, no other occasion
way of friendship, What make you at Elsonower?
man: I am most dreadfully attended; but in the beaten
rest of my seruants: for to speake to you like an honest
   Ham. No such matter. I will not sort you with the

  Both. Wee'l wait vpon you
shall wee to th' Court: for, by my fey I cannot reason?
and out-stretcht Heroes the Beggers Shadowes:
   Ham. Then are our Beggers bodies; and our Monarchs

light a quality, that it is but a shadowes shadow
   Rosin. Truely, and I hold Ambition of so ayry and

   Ham. A dreame it selfe is but a shadow

of a Dreame
very substance of the Ambitious, is meerely the shadow
   Guil. Which dreames indeed are Ambition: for the

I haue bad dreames
count my selfe a King of infinite space; were it not that
   Ham. O God, I could be bounded in a nutshell, and

too narrow for your minde
   Rosin. Why then your Ambition makes it one: 'tis

a prison
either good or bad, but thinking makes it so: to me it is
   Ham. Why then 'tis none to you; for there is nothing

   Rosin. We thinke not so my Lord

worst
Wards, and Dungeons; Denmarke being one o'th'
   Ham. A goodly one, in which there are many Confines,

   Rosin. Then is the World one

  Ham. Denmark's a Prison
  Guil. Prison, my Lord?
that she sends you to Prison hither?
you my good friends, deserued at the hands of Fortune,
not true. Let me question more in particular: what haue
   Ham. Then is Doomesday neere: But your newes is

honest
  Rosin. None my Lord; but that the World's growne
she is a Strumpet. What's the newes?
   Ham. In the secret parts of Fortune? Oh, most true:

  Guil. Faith, her priuates, we
of her fauour?
   Ham. Then you liue about her waste, or in the middle

  Rosin. Neither my Lord
   Ham. Nor the Soales of her Shoo?

Cap, we are not the very Button
   Guild. Happy, in that we are not ouer-happy: on Fortunes

  Rosin. As the indifferent Children of the earth
both?
Guildensterne? Oh, Rosincrane; good Lads: How doe ye
  Ham. My excellent good friends? How do'st thou
  Rosin. My most deare Lord?
   Guild. Mine honour'd Lord?

  Rosin. God saue you Sir

Enter Rosincran and Guildensterne.
hee is.
   Polon. You goe to seeke my Lord Hamlet; there

   Ham. These tedious old fooles

   Polon. Fare you well my Lord

life
will more willingly part withall, except my life, my
   Ham. You cannot Sir take from me any thing, that I

Take my leaue of you
My Honourable Lord, I will most humbly
Betweene him, and my daughter.
And sodainely contriue the meanes of meeting
I will leaue him,
So prosperously be deliuer'd of.
Which Reason and Sanitie could not
That often Madnesse hits on,
A happinesse,
How pregnant (sometimes) his Replies are?
  Pol. Indeed that is out o'th' Ayre:
  Ham. Into my Graue?
Out of the ayre my Lord?
Yet there is Method in't: will you walke
   Pol. Though this be madnesse,

go backward
selfe Sir, should be old as I am, if like a Crab you could
not Honestie to haue it thus set downe: For you your
most powerfully, and potently beleeue; yet I holde it
together with weake Hammes. All which Sir, though I
Gumme: and that they haue a plentifull locke of Wit,
their eyes purging thicke Amber, or Plum-Tree
that old men haue gray Beards; that their faces are wrinkled;
   Ham. Slanders Sir: for the Satyricall slaue saies here,

  Pol. I meane the matter you meane, my Lord
  Ham. Betweene who?
   Pol. What is the matter, my Lord?

  Ham. Words, words, words
speake to him againe. What do you read my Lord?
I suffred much extreamity for loue: very neere this. Ile
he is farre gone, farre gone: and truly in my youth,
yet he knew me not at first; he said I was a Fishmonger:
   Pol. How say you by that? Still harping on my daughter:

looke too't
blessing, but not as your daughter may conceiue. Friend
   Ham. Let her not walke i'thSunne: Conception is a

  Pol. I haue my Lord
Haue you a daughter?
being a good kissing Carrion-
   Ham. For if the Sun breed Magots in a dead dogge,

   Pol. That's very true, my Lord

one man pick'd out of two thousand
  Ham. I sir, to be honest as this world goes, is to bee
   Pol. Honest, my Lord?

   Ham. Then I would you were so honest a man

   Pol. Not I my Lord

  Ham. Excellent, excellent well: y'are a Fishmonger
   Pol. Do you know me, my Lord?

  Ham. Well, God-a-mercy
Oh giue me leaue. How does my good Lord Hamlet?

Exit King & Queen.

Ile boord him presently.
   Pol. Away I do beseech you, both away,

Comes reading
  Qu. But looke where sadly the poore wretch

Enter Hamlet reading on a Booke.
   King. We will try it.

And keepe a Farme and Carters
Let me be no Assistant for a State,
And be not from his reason falne thereon;
Marke the encounter: If he loue her not,
Be you and I behinde an Arras then,
   Pol. At such a time Ile loose my Daughter to him,

   Qu. So he ha's indeed

In the Lobby
He walkes foure houres together, heere
  Pol. You know sometimes
   King. How may we try it further?

Within the Center
Where truth is hid, though it were hid indeede
If Circumstances leade me, I will finde
   Pol. Take this from this; if this be otherwise,

  King. Not that I know
When it prou'd otherwise?
That I haue possitiuely said, 'tis so,
   Pol. Hath there bene such a time, I'de fain know that,

  Qu. It may be very likely
   King. Do you thinke 'tis this?

And all we waile for
Into the Madnesse whereon now he raues,
Thence to a Lightnesse, and by this declension
Thence to a Watch, thence into a Weaknesse,
Fell into a Sadnesse, then into a Fast,
And he repulsed. A short Tale to make,
Which done, she tooke the Fruites of my Aduice,
Admit no Messengers, receiue no Tokens:
That she should locke her selfe from his Resort,
This must not be: and then, I Precepts gaue her,
Lord Hamlet is a Prince out of thy Starre,
And (my yong Mistris) thus I did bespeake
What might you thinke? No, I went round to worke,
Or look'd vpon this Loue, with idle sight,
Or giuen my heart a winking, mute and dumbe,
If I had playd the Deske or Table-booke,
Or my deere Maiestie your Queene heere, think,
Before my Daughter told me what might you
As I perceiued it, I must tell you that
When I had seene this hot loue on the wing,
   Pol. I wold faine proue so. But what might you think?

  King. As of a man, faithfull and Honourable
  Pol. What do you thinke of me?
   King. But how hath she receiu'd his Loue?

All giuen to mine eare
As they fell out by Time, by Meanes, and Place,
And more aboue hath his soliciting,
This in Obedience hath my daughter shew'd me:
Machine is to him, Hamlet.
Thine euermore most deere Lady, whilst this
it. Adieu.
reckon my grones; but that I loue thee best, oh most Best beleeue
O deere Ophelia, I am ill at these Numbers: I haue not Art to
But neuer Doubt, I loue.
Doubt Truth to be a Lier,
Doubt, that the Sunne doth moue:
Doubt thou, the Starres are fire,
   Pol. Good Madam stay awhile, I will be faithfull.

   Qu. Came this from Hamlet to her

bosome, these
Phrase: but you shall heare these in her excellent white
That's an ill Phrase, a vilde Phrase, beautified is a vilde
To the Celestiall, and my Soules Idoll, the most beautifed Ophelia.

The Letter.

Hath giuen me this: now gather, and surmise.
Who in her Dutie and Obedience, marke,
I haue a daughter: haue, whil'st she is mine,
Thus it remaines, and the remainder thus. Perpend,
For this effect defectiue, comes by cause,
Or rather say, the cause of this defect;
That we finde out the cause of this effect,
Mad let vs grant him then: and now remaines
But farewell it: for I will vse no Art.
And pittie it is true: A foolish figure,
That he is mad, 'tis true: 'Tis true 'tis pittie,
   Pol. Madam, I sweare I vse no Art at all:

   Qu. More matter, with lesse Art

But let that go
What is't, but to be nothing else but mad.
Mad call I it; for to define true Madnesse,
I will be breefe. Your Noble Sonne is mad:
And tediousnesse, the limbes and outward flourishes,
Therefore, since Breuitie is the Soule of Wit,
Were nothing but to waste Night, Day, and Time.
Why day is day; night, night; and time is time,
What Maiestie should be, what Dutie is,
My Liege, and Madam, to expostulate
  Pol. This businesse is very well ended.

Exit Ambass.

Most welcome home.
Go to your rest, at night wee'l Feast together.
Meane time we thanke you, for your well-tooke Labour.
Answer, and thinke vpon this Businesse.
And at our more consider'd time wee'l read,
   King. It likes vs well:

As therein are set downe
On such regards of safety and allowance,
Through your Dominions, for his Enterprize,
That it might please you to giue quiet passe
With an intreaty heerein further shewne,
So leuied as before, against the Poleak:
And his Commission to imploy those Soldiers
Giues him three thousand Crownes in Annuall Fee,
Whereon old Norwey, ouercome with ioy,
To giue th' assay of Armes against your Maiestie.
Makes Vow before his Vnkle, neuer more
Receiues rebuke from Norwey: and in fine,
On Fortinbras, which he (in breefe) obeyes,
Was falsely borne in hand, sends out Arrests
That so his Sicknesse, Age, and Impotence
It was against your Highnesse, whereat greeued,
But better look'd into, he truly found
To be a preparation 'gainst the Poleak:
His Nephewes Leuies, which to him appear'd
Vpon our first, he sent out to suppresse
  Volt. Most faire returne of Greetings, and Desires.
Say Voltumand, what from our Brother Norwey?
  King. Well, we shall sift him. Welcome good Frends:

Enter Polonius, Voltumand, and Cornelius.
His Fathers death, and our o're-hasty Marriage.
   Qu. I doubt it is no other, but the maine,

The head and sourse of all your Sonnes distemper
He tels me my sweet Queene, that he hath found
   King. Thy selfe do grace to them, and bring them in.

My Newes shall be the Newes to that great Feast
   Pol. Giue first admittance to th' Ambassadors,

   King. Oh speake of that, that I do long to heare

The very cause of Hamlets Lunacie
As I haue vs'd to do: that I haue found
Hunts not the traile of Policie, so sure
And I do thinke, or else this braine of mine
Both to my God, one to my gracious King:
I hold my dutie, as I hold my Soule,
   Pol. Haue I, my Lord? Assure you, my good Liege,

   King. Thou still hast bin the father of good Newes

Are ioyfully return'd
  Pol. Th' Ambassadors from Norwey, my good Lord,

Enter Polonius.
  Queene. Amen.

Enter.
Pleasant and helpfull to him.
   Guil. Heauens make our presence and our practises

And bring the Gentlemen where Hamlet is
Go some of ye,
My too much changed Sonne.
And I beseech you instantly to visit
   Qu. Thankes Guildensterne and gentle Rosincrance.

   King. Thankes Rosincrance, and gentle Guildensterne

To be commanded
To lay our Seruices freely at your feete,
And here giue vp our selues, in the full bent,
   Guil. We both obey,

Then to Entreatie
Put your dread pleasures, more into Command
Might by the Soueraigne power you haue of vs,
   Rosin. Both your Maiesties

As fits a Kings remembrance
Your Visitation shall receiue such thankes
For the supply and profit of our Hope,
As to expend your time with vs a-while,
To shew vs so much Gentrie, and good will,
To whom he more adheres. If it will please you
And sure I am, two men there are not liuing,
   Qu. Good Gentlemen, he hath much talk'd of you,

That open'd lies within our remedie
So much as from Occasions you may gleane,
To draw him on to pleasures, and to gather
Some little time: so by your Companies
That you vouchsafe your rest heere in our Court
And since so Neighbour'd to his youth, and humour,
That being of so young dayes brought vp with him:
I cannot deeme of. I intreat you both,
So much from th' vnderstanding of himselfe,
More then his Fathers death, that thus hath put him
Resembles that it was. What it should bee
Since not th' exterior, nor the inward man
Of Hamlets transformation: so I call it,
Our hastie sending. Something haue you heard
The neede we haue to vse you, did prouoke
Moreouer, that we much did long to see you,
  King. Welcome deere Rosincrance and Guildensterne.

Enter King, Queene, Rosincrane, and Guildensterne Cum alijs.

Scena Secunda.


Exeunt.

More greefe to hide, then hate to vtter loue.
This must be knowne, being kept close might moue
To lacke discretion. Come, go we to the King,
As it is common for the yonger sort
To cast beyond our selues in our Opinions,
It seemes it is as proper to our Age,
And meant to wracke thee: but beshrew my iealousie:
I had not quoted him. I feare he did but trifle,
I am sorrie that with better speed and iudgement
   Pol. That hath made him mad.

His accesse to me
I did repell his Letters, and deny'de
  Ophe. No my good Lord: but as you did command,
What haue you giuen him any hard words of late?
That does afflict our Natures. I am sorrie,
As oft as any passion vnder Heauen,
And leads the will to desperate Vndertakings,
Whose violent property foredoes it selfe,
This is the very extasie of Loue,
   Polon. Goe with me, I will goe seeke the King,

And to the last, bended their light on me
For out adores he went without their helpe;
He seem'd to finde his way without his eyes,
And with his head ouer his shoulders turn'd,
And end his being. That done, he lets me goe,
That it did seeme to shatter all his bulke,
He rais'd a sigh, so pittious and profound,
And thrice his head thus wauing vp and downe;
At last, a little shaking of mine Arme:
As he would draw it. Long staid he so,
He fals to such perusall of my face,
And with his other hand thus o're his brow,
Then goes he to the length of all his arme;
  Ophe. He tooke me by the wrist, and held me hard;
   Polon. What said he?

  Ophe. My Lord, I doe not know: but truly I do feare it
   Polon. Mad for thy Loue?

To speake of horrors: he comes before me
As if he had been loosed out of hell,
And with a looke so pitious in purport,
Pale as his shirt, his knees knocking each other,
Vngartred, and downe giued to his Anckle,
No hat vpon his head, his stockings foul'd,
Lord Hamlet with his doublet all vnbrac'd,
  Ophe. My Lord, as I was sowing in my Chamber,
   Polon. With what, in the name of Heauen?

  Ophe. Alas my Lord, I haue beene so affrighted
How now Ophelia, what's the matter?
  Polon. Farewell:

Enter Ophelia.

Enter.
   Reynol. Well, my Lord.

   Polon. And let him plye his Musicke

   Reynol. I shall my Lord

   Polon. Obserue his inclination in your selfe

   Reynol. Good my Lord

   Polon. God buy you; fare you well

  Reynol. My Lord I haue
Shall you my Sonne; you haue me, haue you not?
So by my former Lecture and aduice
By indirections finde directions out:
With windlesses, and with assaies of Bias,
And thus doe we of wisedome and of reach
Your bait of falshood, takes this Cape of truth;
Videlicet, a Brothell, or so forth. See you now;
I saw him enter such a house of saile;
There falling out at Tennis; or perchance,
There was he gaming, there o'retooke in's Rouse,
Or then or then, with such and such; and as you say,
I saw him yesterday, or tother day;
He closes with you thus. I know the Gentleman,
   Polon. At closes in the consequence, I marry,

At friend, or so, and Gentleman
  Reynol. At closes in the consequence:
I was about say somthing: where did I leaue?
He does: what was I about to say?
   Polon. And then Sir does he this?

   Reynol. Very good my Lord

Of man and Country
According to the Phrase and the Addition,
Good sir, or so, or friend, or Gentleman.
He closes with you in this consequence:
The youth you breath of guilty, be assur'd
Hauing euer seene. In the prenominate crimes,
Marke you your party in conuerse; him you would sound,
As 'twere a thing a little soil'd i'th' working:
You laying these slight sulleyes on my Sonne,
And I belieue it is a fetch of warrant:
   Polon. Marry Sir, heere's my drift,

  Reynol. I my Lord, I would know that
   Polon. Wherefore should you doe this?

   Reynol. But my good Lord

A sauagenes in vnreclaim'd bloud of generall assault
The flash and out-breake of a fiery minde,
That they may seeme the taints of liberty;
That's not my meaning: but breath his faults so quaintly,
That hee is open to Incontinencie;
You must not put another scandall on him,
   Polon. Faith no, as you may season it in the charge;

   Reynol. My Lord that would dishonour him

Quarelling, drabbing. You may goe so farre
   Polon. I, or drinking, fencing, swearing,

   Reynol. As gaming my Lord

To youth and liberty
As are Companions noted and most knowne
But Sir, such wanton, wild, and vsuall slips,
As may dishonour him; take heed of that:
What forgeries you please; marry, none so ranke,
Addicted so and so; and there put on him
But if't be hee I meane, hees very wilde;
   Polon. And in part him, but you may say not well;

  Reynol. I, very well my Lord
And in part him. Doe you marke this Reynoldo?
And thus I know his father and his friends,
Take you as 'twere some distant knowledge of him,
Then your particular demands will touch it,
That they doe know my sonne: Come you more neerer
By this encompassement and drift of question,
What company, at what expence: and finding
And how, and who; what meanes; and where they keepe:
Enquire me first what Danskers are in Paris;
Very well said. Looke you Sir,
   Polon. Marry, well said;

   Reynol. My Lord, I did intend it

Of his behauiour
Before you visite him you make inquiry
   Polon. You shall doe maruels wisely: good Reynoldo,

   Reynol. I will my Lord

  Polon. Giue him his money, and these notes Reynoldo

Enter Polonius, and Reynoldo.

Actus Secundus.


Exeunt.

Nay, come let's goe together.
That euer I was borne to set it right.
The time is out of ioynt: Oh cursed spight,
And still your fingers on your lippes I pray,
God willing shall not lacke: let vs goe in together,
May doe t' expresse his loue and friending to you,
And what so poore a man as Hamlet is,
With all my loue I doe commend me to you;
   Ham. Rest, rest perturbed Spirit: so Gentlemen,

   Ghost. Sweare

Sweare
So grace and mercy at your most neede helpe you:
That you know ought of me; this not to doe:
Or such ambiguous giuing out to note,
Or if we list to speake; or there be and if there might,
As well, we know, or we could and if we would,
Or by pronouncing of some doubtfull Phrase;
With Armes encombred thus, or thus, head shake;
That you at such time seeing me, neuer shall
To put an Anticke disposition on:)
(As I perchance heereafter shall thinke meet
How strange or odde so ere I beare my selfe;
Here as before, neuer so helpe you mercy,
Then are dream't of in our Philosophy. But come,
There are more things in Heauen and Earth, Horatio,
   Ham. And therefore as a stranger giue it welcome.

   Hor. Oh day and night: but this is wondrous strange

A worthy Pioner, once more remoue good friends
   Ham. Well said old Mole, can'st worke i'th' ground so fast?

   Gho. Sweare

Sweare by my Sword
Neuer to speake of this that you haue heard:
And lay your hands againe vpon my sword,
Come hither Gentlemen,
   Ham. Hic & vbique? Then wee'l shift for grownd,

   Gho. Sweare

Sweare by my sword
   Ham. Neuer to speake of this that you haue seene.

   Hor. Propose the Oath my Lord

Consent to sweare
Come one you here this fellow in the selleredge
  Ham. Ah ha boy, sayest thou so. Art thou there truepenny?

Ghost cries vnder the Stage.

   Gho. Sweare.

   Ham. Indeed, vpon my sword, Indeed

   Marcell. We haue sworne my Lord already

   Ham. Vpon my sword

   Mar. Nor I my Lord: in faith

   Hor. Infaith my Lord, not I

   Ham. Nay, but swear't

   Both. My Lord, we will not

   Ham. Neuer make known what you haue seen to night

   Hor. What is't my Lord? we will

Giue me one poore request
As you are Friends, Schollers and Soldiers,
O'remaster't as you may. And now good friends,
For your desire to know what is betweene vs,
It is an honest Ghost, that let me tell you:
And much offence too, touching this Vision heere:
   Ham. Yes, by Saint Patricke, but there is my Lord,

   Hor. There's no offence my Lord

Yes faith, heartily
   Ham. I'm sorry they offend you heartily:

   Hor. These are but wild and hurling words, my Lord

Looke you, Ile goe pray
Such as it is: and for mine owne poore part,
For euery man ha's businesse and desire,
You, as your busines and desires shall point you:
I hold it fit that we shake hands, and part:
And so, without more circumstance at all,
   Ham. Why right, you are i'th' right;

Graue, to tell vs this
   Hor. There needs no Ghost my Lord, come from the

But hee's an arrant knaue
   Ham. There's nere a villaine dwelling in all Denmarke

  Both. I, by Heau'n, my Lord
But you'l be secret?
   Ham. How say you then, would heart of man once think it?

   Mar. Nor I, my Lord

   Hor. Not I, my Lord, by Heauen

   Ham. No you'l reueale it

  Hor. Good my Lord tell it
  Ham. Oh wonderfull!
  Hor. What newes, my Lord?
   Mar. How ist my Noble Lord?

   Ham. Hillo, ho, ho, boy; come bird, come

   Hor. Illo, ho, ho, my Lord

   Mar. So be it

   Hor. Heauen secure him

  Mar. Lord Hamlet

Enter Horatio and Marcellus.
   Hor. & Mar. within. My Lord, my Lord.

It is; Adue, Adue, Remember me: I haue sworn't
So Vnckle there you are: now to my word;
At least I'm sure it may be so in Denmarke;
That one may smile, and smile and be a Villaine;
My Tables, my Tables; meet it is I set it downe,
Oh Villaine, Villaine, smiling damned Villaine!
Oh most pernicious woman!
Vnmixt with baser matter; yes yes, by Heauen:
Within the Booke and Volume of my Braine,
And thy Commandment all alone shall liue
That youth and obseruation coppied there;
All sawes of Bookes, all formes, all presures past,
Ile wipe away all triuiall fond Records,
Yea, from the Table of my Memory,
In this distracted Globe: Remember thee?
I, thou poore Ghost, while memory holds a seate
But beare me stiffely vp: Remember thee?
And you my sinnewes, grow not instant Old;
And shall I couple Hell? Oh fie: hold my heart;
  Ham. Oh all you host of Heauen! Oh Earth; what els?

Enter.
Adue, adue, Hamlet: remember me.
And gins to pale his vneffectuall Fire:
The Glow-worme showes the Matine to be neere,
To pricke and sting her. Fare thee well at once;
And to those Thornes that in her bosome lodge,
Against thy Mother ought; leaue her to heauen,
Taint not thy mind; nor let thy Soule contriue
But howsoeuer thou pursuest this Act,
A Couch for Luxury and damned Incest.
Let not the Royall Bed of Denmarke be
If thou hast nature in thee beare it not;
Oh horrible Oh horrible, most horrible:
With all my imperfections on my head;
No reckoning made, but sent to my account
Vnhouzzled, disappointed, vnnaneld,
Cut off euen in the Blossomes of my Sinne,
Of Life, of Crowne, and Queene at once dispatcht;
Thus was I, sleeping, by a Brothers hand,
All my smooth Body.
Most Lazar-like, with vile and loathsome crust,
And a most instant Tetter bak'd about,
The thin and wholsome blood: so did it mine;
And curd, like Aygre droppings into Milke,
And with a sodaine vigour it doth posset
The naturall Gates and Allies of the body;
That swift as Quick-siluer, it courses through
Holds such an enmity with bloud of Man,
The leaperous Distilment; whose effect
And in the Porches of mine eares did poure
With iuyce of cursed Hebenon in a Violl,
Vpon my secure hower thy Vncle stole
My custome alwayes in the afternoone;
Briefe let me be: Sleeping within mine Orchard,
But soft, me thinkes I sent the Mornings Ayre;
Will sate it selfe in a Celestiall bed, & prey on Garbage.
So Lust, though to a radiant Angell link'd,
Though Lewdnesse court it in a shape of Heauen:
To those of mine. But Vertue, as it neuer wil be moued,
Vpon a wretch, whose Naturall gifts were poore
I made to her in Marriage; and to decline
That it went hand in hand, euen with the Vow
From me, whose loue was of that dignity,
Oh Hamlet, what a falling off was there,
The will of my most seeming vertuous Queene:
So to seduce? Won to this shamefull Lust
Oh wicked Wit, and Gifts, that haue the power
With witchcraft of his wits, hath Traitorous guifts.
  Ghost. I that incestuous, that adulterate Beast
   Ham. O my Propheticke soule: mine Vncle?

Now weares his Crowne
The Serpent that did sting thy Fathers life,
Rankly abus'd: But know thou Noble youth,
Is by a forged processe of my death
A Serpent stung me: so the whole eare of Denmarke,
It's giuen out, that sleeping in mine Orchard,
Would'st thou not stirre in this. Now Hamlet heare:
That rots it selfe in ease, on Lethe Wharfe,
And duller should'st thou be then the fat weede
   Ghost. I finde thee apt,

May sweepe to my Reuenge
As meditation, or the thoughts of Loue,
That with wings as swift
   Ham. Hast, hast me to know it,

But this most foule, strange, and vnnaturall
  Ghost. Murther most foule, as in the best it is;
   Ham. Murther?

  Gho. Reuenge his foule and most vnnaturall Murther
   Ham. Oh Heauen!

If thou didst euer thy deare Father loue
To eares of flesh and bloud; list Hamlet, oh list,
But this eternall blason must not be
Like Quilles vpon the fretfull Porpentine:
And each particular haire to stand an end,
Thy knotty and combined lockes to part,
Make thy two eyes like Starres, start from their Spheres,
Would harrow vp thy soule, freeze thy young blood,
I could a Tale vnfold, whose lightest word
To tell the secrets of my Prison-House;
Are burnt and purg'd away? But that I am forbid
Till the foule crimes done in my dayes of Nature
And for the day confin'd to fast in Fiers,
Doom'd for a certaine terme to walke the night;
  Gho. I am thy Fathers Spirit,
   Ham. What?

   Gho. So art thou to reuenge, when thou shalt heare

   Ham. Speake, I am bound to heare

To what I shall vnfold
   Gho. Pitty me not, but lend thy serious hearing

   Ham. Alas poore Ghost

Must render vp my selfe
When I to sulphurous and tormenting Flames
   Gho. My hower is almost come,

   Ham. I will

   Gho. Marke me

  Ham. Where wilt thou lead me? speak; Ile go no further

Enter Ghost and Hamlet.

Exeunt.

   Mar. Nay, let's follow him.

   Hor. Heauen will direct it

  Mar. Something is rotten in the State of Denmarke
   Hor. Haue after, to what issue will this come?

   Mar. Let's follow; 'tis not fit thus to obey him

  Hor. He waxes desperate with imagination

Exeunt. Ghost & Hamlet.

I say away, goe on, Ile follow thee.
By Heau'n, Ile make a Ghost of him that lets me:
Still am I cal'd? Vnhand me Gentlemen:
As hardy as the Nemian Lions nerue:
And makes each petty Artire in this body,
   Ham. My fate cries out,

   Hor. Be rul'd, you shall not goe

   Ham. Hold off your hand

   Mar. You shall not goe my Lord

  Ham. It wafts me still: goe on, Ile follow thee
And draw you into madnesse thinke of it?
Which might depriue your Soueraignty of Reason,
And there assumes some other horrible forme,
That beetles o're his base into the Sea,
Or to the dreadfull Sonnet of the Cliffe,
   Hor. What if it tempt you toward the Floud my Lord?

It waues me forth againe; Ile follow it
Being a thing immortall as it selfe:
And for my Soule, what can it doe to that?
I doe not set my life at a pins fee;
   Ham. Why, what should be the feare?

   Hor. Doe not my Lord

   Ham. It will not speake: then will I follow it

   Hor. No, by no meanes

But doe not goe with it
It wafts you to a more remoued ground:
   Mar. Looke with what courteous action

To you alone
As if it some impartment did desire
  Hor. It beckons you to goe away with it,

Ghost beckens Hamlet.

Say, why is this? wherefore? what should we doe?
With thoughts beyond thee; reaches of our Soules,
So horridly to shake our disposition,
Making Night hidious? And we fooles of Nature,
Reuisits thus the glimpses of the Moone,
That thou dead Coarse againe in compleat steele,
To cast thee vp againe? What may this meane?
Hath op'd his ponderous and Marble iawes,
Wherein we saw thee quietly enurn'd,
Haue burst their cerments, why the Sepulcher
Why thy Canoniz'd bones Hearsed in death,
Let me not burst in Ignorance; but tell
King, Father, Royall Dane: Oh, oh, answer me,
That I will speake to thee. Ile call thee Hamlet,
Thou com'st in such a questionable shape
Be thy euents wicked or charitable,
Bring with thee ayres from Heauen, or blasts from Hell,
Be thou a Spirit of health, or Goblin damn'd,
   Ham. Angels and Ministers of Grace defend vs:

  Hor. Looke my Lord, it comes

Enter Ghost.
More honour'd in the breach, then the obseruance.
And to the manner borne: It is a Custome
And to my mind, though I am natiue heere,
  Ham. I marry ist;
   Horat. Is it a custome?

The triumph of his Pledge
The kettle Drum and Trumpet thus bray out
And as he dreines his draughts of Renish downe,
Keepes wassels and the swaggering vpspring reeles,
  Ham. The King doth wake to night, and takes his rouse,
What does this meane my Lord?
Wherein the Spirit held his wont to walke.
   Hor. Indeed I heard it not: then it drawes neere the season,

   Mar. No, it is strooke

  Hor. I thinke it lacks of twelue
   Ham. What hower now?

  Hor. It is a nipping and an eager ayre
  Ham. The Ayre bites shrewdly: is it very cold?

Enter Hamlet, Horatio, Marcellus.

Exeunt.

   Ophe. I shall obey my Lord.

Looke too't, I charge you; come your wayes
As to giue words or talke with the Lord Hamlet:
Haue you so slander any moment leisure,
I would not, in plaine tearmes, from this time forth,
The better to beguile. This is for all:
Breathing like sanctified and pious bonds,
But meere implorators of vnholy Sutes,
Not of the eye, which their Inuestments show:
Doe not beleeue his vowes; for they are Broakers,
Then may be giuen you. In few, Ophelia,
And with a larger tether may he walke,
Beleeue so much in him, that he is young,
Then a command to parley. For Lord Hamlet,
Set your entreatments at a higher rate,
Be somewhat scanter of your Maiden presence;
You must not take for fire. For this time Daughter,
Euen in their promise, as it is a making;
Giuing more light then heate; extinct in both,
Giues the tongue vowes: these blazes, Daughter,
When the Bloud burnes, how Prodigall the Soule
   Polon. I, Springes to catch Woodcocks. I doe know

My Lord, with all the vowes of Heauen
   Ophe. And hath giuen countenance to his speech,

   Polon. I, fashion you may call it, go too, go too

In honourable fashion
   Ophe. My Lord, he hath importun'd me with loue,

Roaming it thus, you'l tender me a foole
Or not to crack the winde of the poore Phrase,
Which are not starling. Tender your selfe more dearly;
That you haue tane his tenders for true pay,
   Polon. Marry Ile teach you; thinke your selfe a Baby,

  Ophe. I do not know, my Lord, what I should thinke
Doe you beleeue his tenders, as you call them?
Vnsifted in such perillous Circumstance.
   Polon. Affection, puh. You speake like a greene Girle,

Of his affection to me
  Ophe. He hath my Lord of late, made many tenders
What is betweene you, giue me vp the truth?
As it behoues my Daughter, and your Honour.
You doe not vnderstand your selfe so cleerely,
And that in way of caution: I must tell you,
If it be so, as so tis put on me;
Haue of your audience beene most free and bounteous.
Giuen priuate time to you; and you your selfe
Tis told me he hath very oft of late
   Polon. Marry, well bethought:

  Ophe. So please you, somthing touching the L[ord]. Hamlet
  Polon. What ist Ophelia he hath said to you?

Exit Laer.

   Laer. Farewell.

And you your selfe shall keepe the key of it
   Ophe. Tis in my memory lockt,

What I haue said to you
   Laer. Farewell Ophelia, and remember well

   Polon. The time inuites you, goe, your seruants tend

   Laer. Most humbly doe I take my leaue, my Lord

Farewell: my Blessing season this in thee
Thou canst not then be false to any man.
And it must follow, as the Night the Day,
This aboue all; to thine owne selfe be true:
And borrowing duls the edge of Husbandry.
For lone oft loses both it selfe and friend:
Neither a borrower, nor a lender be;
Are of a most select and generous cheff in that.
And they in France of the best ranck and station,
For the Apparell oft proclaimes the man.
But not exprest in fancie; rich, not gawdie:
Costly thy habit as thy purse can buy;
Take each mans censure; but reserue thy iudgement:
Giue euery man thine eare; but few thy voyce:
Bear't that th' opposed may beware of thee.
Of entrance to a quarrell: but being in
Of each vnhatch't, vnfledg'd Comrade. Beware
But doe not dull thy palme, with entertainment
Grapple them to thy Soule, with hoopes of Steele:
The friends thou hast, and their adoption tride,
Be thou familiar; but by no meanes vulgar:
Nor any vnproportion'd thoughts his Act:
See thou Character. Giue thy thoughts no tongue,
And these few Precepts in thy memory,
And you are staid for there: my blessing with you;
The winde sits in the shoulder of your saile,
   Polon. Yet heere Laertes? Aboord, aboord for shame,

Occasion smiles vpon a second leaue
A double blessing is a double grace;
I stay too long; but here my Father comes:

Enter Polonius.
   Laer. Oh, feare me not.

And reaks not his owne reade
Himselfe, the Primrose path of dalliance treads,
Whilst like a puft and recklesse Libertine
Shew me the steepe and thorny way to Heauen;
Doe not as some vngracious Pastors doe,
As watchmen to my heart: but good my Brother
   Ophe. I shall th' effect of this good Lesson keepe,

Youth to it selfe rebels, though none else neere
Be wary then, best safety lies in feare;
Contagious blastments are most imminent.
And in the Morne and liquid dew of Youth,
Too oft before the buttons be disclos'd,
The Canker Galls, the Infants of the Spring
Vertue it selfe scapes not calumnious stroakes,
If she vnmaske her beauty to the Moone:
The chariest Maid is Prodigall enough,
Out of the shot and danger of Desire.
And keepe within the reare of your Affection;
Feare it Ophelia, feare it my deare Sister,
To his vnmastred importunity.
Or lose your Heart; or your chast Treasure open
If with too credent eare you list his Songs;
Then weight what losse your Honour may sustaine,
Then the maine voyce of Denmarke goes withall.
May giue his saying deed: which is no further,
As he in his peculiar Sect and force
It fits your wisedome so farre to beleeue it;
Whereof he is the Head. Then if he sayes he loues you,
Vnto the voyce and yeelding of that Body,
And therefore must his choyce be circumscrib'd
The sanctity and health of the whole State.
Carue for himselfe; for, on his choyce depends
Hee may not, as vnuallued persons doe,
For hee himselfe is subiect to his Birth:
His greatnesse weigh'd, his will is not his owne;
The vertue of his feare: but you must feare
And now no soyle nor cautell doth besmerch
Growes wide withall. Perhaps he loues you now,
The inward seruice of the Minde and Soule
In thewes and Bulke: but as his Temple waxes,
For nature cressant does not grow alone,
   Laer. Thinke it no more:

   Ophel. No more but so

The suppliance of a minute? No more
Froward, not permanent; sweet not lasting
A Violet in the youth of Primy Nature;
Hold it a fashion and a toy in Bloude;
  Laer. For Hamlet, and the trifling of his fauours,
   Ophel. Doe you doubt that?

But let me heare from you
And Conuoy is assistant; doe not sleepe,
And Sister, as the Winds giue Benefit,
  Laer. My necessaries are imbark't; Farewell:

Enter Laertes and Ophelia.


Scena Tertia


Enter.
Though all the earth orewhelm them to mens eies.
Till then sit still my soule; foule deeds will rise,
I doubt some foule play: would the Night were come;
My Fathers Spirit in Armes? All is not well:
   Ham. Your loue, as mine to you: farewell.

Exeunt

   All. Our duty to your Honour.

Ile visit you
Vpon the Platforme twixt eleuen and twelue,
I will requite your loues; so fare ye well:
Giue it an vnderstanding but no tongue;
And whatsoeuer els shall hap to night,
Let it bee treble in your silence still:
If you haue hitherto conceald this sight;
And bid me hold my peace. I pray you all,
Ile speake to it, though Hell it selfe should gape
   Ham. If it assume my noble Fathers person,

   Hor. I warrant you it will

   Ham. Ile watch to Night; perchance 'twill wake againe

A Sable Siluer'd
   Hor. It was, as I haue seene it in his life,

   Ham. His Beard was grisly? no

   Hor. Not when I saw't

   All. Longer, longer

  Hor. While one with moderate hast might tell a hundred
   Ham. Very like, very like: staid it long?

   Hor. It would haue much amaz'd you

   Ham. I would I had beene there

  Hor. Most constantly
   Ham. And fixt his eyes vpon you?

  Hor. Nay very pale
   Ham. Pale, or red?

  Hor. A countenance more in sorrow then in anger
   Ham. What, lookt he frowningly?

  Hor. O yes, my Lord, he wore his Beauer vp
   Ham. Then saw you not his face?

  Both. My Lord, from head to foote
   Ham. From top to toe?

  Both. Arm'd, my Lord
   Ham. Arm'd, say you?

  Both. We doe my Lord
Hold you the watch to Night?
   Ham. Indeed, indeed Sirs; but this troubles me.

To let you know of it
And we did thinke it writ downe in our duty
   Hor. As I doe liue my honourd Lord 'tis true;

   Ham. Tis very strange

And vanisht from our sight
And at the sound it shrunke in hast away,
But euen then, the Morning Cocke crew lowd;
It selfe to motion, like as it would speake:
It lifted vp it head, and did addresse
But answere made it none: yet once me thought
  Hor. My Lord, I did;
   Ham. Did you not speake to it?

  Mar. My Lord vpon the platforme where we watcht
   Ham. But where was this?

These hands are not more like
The Apparition comes. I knew your Father:
Forme of the thing; each word made true and good,
Whereas they had deliuer'd both in time,
And I with them the third Night kept the Watch,
In dreadfull secrecie impart they did,
Stand dumbe and speake not to him. This to me
Almost to Ielly with the Act of feare,
Within his Truncheons length; whilst they bestil'd
By their opprest and feare-surprized eyes,
Goes slow and stately: By them thrice he walkt,
Appeares before them, and with sollemne march
Arm'd at all points exactly, Cap a Pe,
Beene thus encountred. A figure like your Father,
In the dead wast and middle of the night
(Marcellus and Barnardo) on their Watch
   Hor. Two nights together, had these Gentlemen

   Ham. For Heauens loue let me heare

This maruell to you
Vpon the witnesse of these Gentlemen,
With an attent eare; till I may deliuer
  Hor. Season your admiration for a while
   Ham. The King my Father?

  Hor. My Lord, the King your Father
   Ham. Saw? Who?

   Hor. My Lord, I thinke I saw him yesternight

I shall not look vpon his like againe
   Ham. He was a man, take him for all in all:

  Hor. I saw him once; he was a goodly King
  Ham. In my minds eye (Horatio)
   Hor. Oh where my Lord?

My father, me thinkes I see my father
Ere I had euer seene that day Horatio.
Would I had met my dearest foe in heauen,
Did coldly furnish forth the Marriage Tables;
   Ham. Thrift thrift Horatio: the Funerall Bakt-meats

   Hor. Indeed my Lord, it followed hard vpon

I thinke it was to see my Mothers Wedding
   Ham. I pray thee doe not mock me (fellow Student)

   Hor. My Lord, I came to see your Fathers Funerall

Wee'l teach you to drinke deepe, ere you depart
But what is your affaire in Elsenour?
Against your selfe. I know you are no Truant:
To make it truster of your owne report
Nor shall you doe mine eare that violence,
   Ham. I would not haue your Enemy say so;

  Hor. A truant disposition, good my Lord
But what in faith make you from Wittemberge?
   Ham. I am very glad to see you: good euen Sir.

   Mar. My good Lord

Marcellus
And what make you from Wittenberg Horatio?
Ile change that name with you:
   Ham. Sir my good friend,

And your poore Seruant euer
   Hor. The same my Lord,

Horatio, or I do forget my selfe
   Ham. I am glad to see you well:

  Hor. Haile to your Lordship

Enter Horatio, Barnardo, and Marcellus.
But breake my heart, for I must hold my tongue.
It is not, nor it cannot come to good.
With such dexterity to Incestuous sheets:
She married. O most wicked speed, to post
Had left the flushing of her gauled eyes,
Ere yet the salt of most vnrighteous Teares
Then I to Hercules. Within a Moneth?
My Fathers Brother: but no more like my Father,
Would haue mourn'd longer) married with mine Vnkle,
(O Heauen! A beast that wants discourse of Reason
Like Niobe, all teares. Why she, euen she.
With which she followed my poore Fathers body
A little Month, or ere those shooes were old,
Let me not thinke on't: Frailty, thy name is woman.
By what is fed on; and yet within a month?
As if encrease of Appetite had growne
Must I remember: why she would hang on him,
Visit her face too roughly. Heauen and Earth
That he might not beteene the windes of heauen
Hiperion to a Satyre: so louing to my Mother,
So excellent a King, that was to this
But two months dead: Nay, not so much; not two,
Possesse it meerely. That it should come to this:
That growes to Seed: Things rank, and grosse in Nature
Fie on't? Oh fie, fie, 'tis an vnweeded Garden
Seemes to me all the vses of this world?
How weary, stale, flat, and vnprofitable
His Cannon 'gainst Selfe-slaughter. O God, O God!
Or that the Euerlasting had not fixt
Thaw, and resolue it selfe into a Dew:
  Ham. Oh that this too too solid Flesh, would melt,

Manet Hamlet.

Exeunt.

Respeaking earthly Thunder. Come away.
And the Kings Rouce, the Heauens shall bruite againe,
But the great Cannon to the Clowds shall tell,
No iocond health that Denmarke drinkes to day,
Sits smiling to my heart; in grace whereof,
This gentle and vnforc'd accord of Hamlet
Be as our selfe in Denmarke. Madam come,
   King. Why 'tis a louing, and a faire Reply,

Obey you Madam
   Ham. I shall in all my best

I prythee stay with vs, go not to Wittenberg
   Qu. Let not thy Mother lose her Prayers Hamlet:

Our cheefest Courtier Cosin, and our Sonne
Heere in the cheere and comfort of our eye,
And we beseech you, bend you to remaine
It is most retrograde to our desire:
In going backe to Schoole in Wittenberg,
Do I impart towards you. For your intent
Then that which deerest Father beares his Sonne,
And with no lesse Nobility of Loue,
You are the most immediate to our Throne,
As of a Father; For let the world take note,
This vnpreuayling woe, and thinke of vs
This must be so. We pray you throw to earth
From the first Coarse, till he that dyed to day,
Is death of Fathers, and who still hath cried,
To Reason most absurd, whose common Theame
A fault against the Dead, a fault to Nature,
Take it to heart? Fye, 'tis a fault to Heauen,
Why should we in our peeuish Opposition
As any the most vulgar thing to sence,
For, what we know must be, and is as common
An Vnderstanding simple, and vnschool'd:
A Heart vnfortified, a Minde impatient,
It shewes a will most incorrect to Heauen,
Of impious stubbornnesse. 'Tis vnmanly greefe,
In obstinate Condolement, is a course
To do obsequious Sorrow. But to perseuer
In filiall Obligation, for some terme
That Father lost, lost his, and the Suruiuer bound
But you must know, your Father lost a Father,
To giue these mourning duties to your Father:
In your Nature Hamlet,
   King. 'Tis sweet and commendable

These, but the Trappings, and the Suites of woe
But I haue that Within, which passeth show;
For they are actions that a man might play:
That can denote me truly. These indeed Seeme,
Together with all Formes, Moods, shewes of Griefe,
Nor the deiected hauiour of the Visage,
No, nor the fruitfull Riuer in the Eye,
Nor windy suspiration of forc'd breath,
Nor Customary suites of solemne Blacke,
'Tis not alone my Inky Cloake (good Mother)
   Ham. Seemes Madam? Nay, it is: I know not Seemes:

Why seemes it so particular with thee
   Queen. If it be;

   Ham. I Madam, it is common

Passing through Nature, to Eternity
Thou know'st 'tis common, all that liues must dye,
Seeke for thy Noble Father in the dust;
Do not for euer with thy veyled lids
And let thine eye looke like a Friend on Denmarke.
   Queen. Good Hamlet cast thy nightly colour off,

  Ham. Not so my Lord, I am too much i'th' Sun
   King. How is it that the Clouds still hang on you?

  Ham. A little more then kin, and lesse then kinde
But now my Cosin Hamlet, and my Sonne?
And thy best graces spend it at thy will:
   King. Take thy faire houre Laertes, time be thine,

I do beseech you giue him leaue to go
  Pol. He hath my Lord:
What sayes Pollonius?
   King. Haue you your Fathers leaue?

And bow them to your gracious leaue and pardon
My thoughts and wishes bend againe towards France,
Yet now I must confesse, that duty done,
To shew my duty in your Coronation,
From whence, though willingly I came to Denmarke
Your leaue and fauour to returne to France,
  Laer. Dread my Lord,
What would'st thou haue Laertes?
Then is the Throne of Denmarke to thy Father.
The Hand more instrumentall to the Mouth,
The Head is not more Natiue to the Heart,
That shall not be my Offer, not thy Asking?
And loose your voyce. What would'st thou beg Laertes,
You cannot speake of Reason to the Dane,
You told vs of some suite. What is't Laertes?
And now Laertes, what's the newes with you?

Exit Voltemand and Cornelius.

   King. We doubt it nothing, heartily farewell.

   Volt. In that, and all things, will we shew our duty

Farewell, and let your hast commend your duty
Of these dilated Articles allow:
To businesse with the King, more then the scope
Giuing to you no further personall power
For bearing of this greeting to old Norway,
You good Cornelius, and you Voltemand,
Out of his subiect: and we heere dispatch
The Lists, and full proportions are all made
His further gate heerein. In that the Leuies,
Of this his Nephewes purpose, to suppresse
Who Impotent and Bedrid, scarsely heares
To Norway, Vncle of young Fortinbras,
Thus much the businesse is. We haue heere writ
Now for our selfe, and for this time of meeting

Enter Voltemand and Cornelius.
To our most valiant Brother. So much for him.
Lost by his Father: with all Bonds of Law
Importing the surrender of those Lands
He hath not fayl'd to pester vs with Message,
Colleagued with the dreame of his Aduantage;
Our State to be disioynt, and out of Frame,
Or thinking by our late deere Brothers death,
Holding a weake supposall of our worth;
Now followes, that you know young Fortinbras,
With this affaire along, for all our Thankes.
Your better Wisedomes, which haue freely gone
Taken to Wife; nor haue we heerein barr'd
In equall Scale weighing Delight and Dole
With mirth in Funerall, and with Dirge in Marriage,
With one Auspicious, and one Dropping eye,
Haue we, as 'twere, with a defeated ioy,
Th' imperiall Ioyntresse of this warlike State,
Therefore our sometimes Sister, now our Queene,
Together with remembrance of our selues.
That we with wisest sorrow thinke on him,
Yet so farre hath Discretion fought with Nature,
To be contracted in one brow of woe:
To beare our hearts in greefe, and our whole Kingdome
The memory be greene: and that it vs befitted
  King. Though yet of Hamlet our deere Brothers death

Laertes, and his Sister Ophelia, Lords Attendant.
Polonius,
Enter Claudius King of Denmarke, Gertrude the Queene, Hamlet,

Scena Secunda.

Exeunt.

Where we shall finde him most conueniently.
  Mar. Let do't I pray, and I this morning know
As needfull in our Loues, fitting our Duty?
Do you consent we shall acquaint him with it,
This Spirit dumbe to vs, will speake to him:
Vnto yong Hamlet. For vpon my life,
Let vs impart what we haue seene to night
Breake we our Watch vp, and by my aduice
Walkes o're the dew of yon high Easterne Hill,
But looke, the Morne in Russet mantle clad,
   Hor. So haue I heard, and do in part beleeue it.

So hallow'd, and so gracious is the time
No Faiery talkes, nor Witch hath power to Charme:
The nights are wholsome, then no Planets strike,
And then (they say) no Spirit can walke abroad,
The Bird of Dawning singeth all night long:
Wherein our Sauiours Birch is celebrated,
Some sayes, that euer 'gainst that Season comes
   Mar. It faded on the crowing of the Cocke.

This present Obiect made probation
To his Confine. And of the truth heerein,
Th' extrauagant, and erring Spirit, hyes
Whether in Sea, or Fire, in Earth, or Ayre,
Awake the God of Day: and at his warning,
Doth with his lofty and shrill-sounding Throate
The Cocke that is the Trumpet to the day,
Vpon a fearfull Summons. I haue heard,
   Hor. And then it started, like a guilty thing

   Barn. It was about to speake, when the Cocke crew

And our vaine blowes, malicious Mockery
For it is as the Ayre, invulnerable,
To offer it the shew of Violence,
We do it wrong, being so Maiesticall

Exit Ghost.

   Mar. 'Tis gone.

   Hor. 'Tis heere

   Barn. 'Tis heere

  Hor. Do, if it will not stand
   Mar. Shall I strike at it with my Partizan?

Speake of it. Stay, and speake. Stop it Marcellus
(For which, they say, you Spirits oft walke in death)
Extorted Treasure in the wombe of Earth,
Or, if thou hast vp-hoorded in thy life
(Which happily foreknowing may auoyd) Oh speake.
If thou art priuy to thy Countries Fate
That may to thee do ease, and grace to me; speak to me.
Speake to me. If there be any good thing to be done,
If thou hast any sound, or vse of Voyce,
Ile crosse it, though it blast me. Stay Illusion:
But soft, behold: Loe, where it comes againe:

Enter Ghost againe.
Of this post-hast, and Romage in the Land.
The Sourse of this our Watch, and the cheefe head
Is the maine Motiue of our Preparations,
So by his Father lost: and this (I take it)
And termes Compulsatiue, those foresaid Lands
But to recouer of vs by strong hand
(And it doth well appeare vnto our State)
That hath a stomacke in't: which is no other
For Foode and Diet, to some Enterprize
Shark'd vp a List of Landlesse Resolutes,
Hath in the skirts of Norway, heere and there,
Of vnimproued Mettle, hot and full,
His fell to Hamlet. Now sir, young Fortinbras,
And carriage of the Article designe,
Had he bin Vanquisher, as by the same Cou'nant
To the Inheritance of Fortinbras,
Was gaged by our King: which had return'd
Against the which, a Moity competent
Which he stood seiz'd on, to the Conqueror:
Did forfeite (with his life) all those his Lands
Well ratified by Law, and Heraldrie,
Did slay this Fortinbras: who by a Seal'd Compact,
(For so this side of our knowne world esteem'd him)
Dar'd to the Combate. In which, our Valiant Hamlet,
(Thereto prick'd on by a most emulate Pride)
Was (as you know) by Fortinbras of Norway,
Whose Image euen but now appear'd to vs,
At least the whisper goes so: Our last King,
  Hor. That can I,
Who is't that can informe me?
Doth make the Night ioynt-Labourer with the day:
What might be toward, that this sweaty hast
Do's not diuide the Sunday from the weeke,
Why such impresse of Ship-wrights, whose sore Taske
And Forraigne Mart for Implements of warre:
And why such dayly Cast of Brazon Cannon
So nightly toyles the subiect of the Land,
Why this same strict and most obseruant Watch,
   Mar. Good now sit downe, & tell me he that knowes

This boades some strange erruption to our State
But in the grosse and scope of my Opinion,
   Hor. In what particular thought to work, I know not:

With Martiall stalke, hath he gone by our Watch
   Mar. Thus twice before, and iust at this dead houre,

'Tis strange
He smot the sledded Pollax on the Ice.
So frown'd he once, when in an angry parle
When th' Ambitious Norwey combatted:
Such was the very Armour he had on,
  Hor. As thou art to thy selfe,
   Mar. Is it not like the King?

Of mine owne eyes
Without the sensible and true auouch
  Hor. Before my God, I might not this beleeue
What thinke you on't?
Is not this something more then Fantasie?
   Barn. How now Horatio? You tremble & look pale:

  Mar. 'Tis gone, and will not answer

Exit the Ghost.

   Hor. Stay: speake; speake: I Charge thee, speake.

   Barn. See, it stalkes away

   Mar. It is offended

Did sometimes march: By Heauen I charge thee speake
In which the Maiesty of buried Denmarke
Together with that Faire and Warlike forme
   Hor. What art thou that vsurp'st this time of night,

   Mar. Question it Horatio

  Barn. It would be spoke too
   Hora. Most like: It harrowes me with fear & wonder

   Barn. Lookes it not like the King? Marke it Horatio

   Mar. Thou art a Scholler; speake to it Horatio

   Barn. In the same figure, like the King that's dead

Looke where it comes againe

Enter the Ghost.
   Mar. Peace, breake thee of:

The Bell then beating one
Where now it burnes, Marcellus and my selfe,
Had made his course t' illume that part of Heauen
When yond same Starre that's Westward from the Pole
   Barn. Last night of all,

And let vs heare Barnardo speake of this
   Hor. Well, sit we downe,

What we two Nights haue seene
That are so fortified against our Story,
And let vs once againe assaile your eares,
   Bar. Sit downe a-while,

   Hor. Tush, tush, 'twill not appeare

He may approue our eyes, and speake to it
That if againe this Apparition come,
With vs, to watch the minutes of this Night,
Therefore I haue intreated him along
Touching this dreaded sight, twice seene of vs,
And will not let beleefe take hold of him
   Mar. Horatio saies, 'tis but our Fantasie,

   Bar. I haue seene nothing

   Mar. What, ha's this thing appear'd againe to night

   Bar. Welcome Horatio, welcome good Marcellus

  Hor. A peece of him
   Bar. Say, what is Horatio there?

  Mar. Holla Barnardo

Exit Fran.

  Fra. Barnardo ha's my place: giue you goodnight.
   Mar. O farwel honest Soldier, who hath relieu'd you?

   Fran. Giue you good night

   Mar. And Leige-men to the Dane

  Hor. Friends to this ground
  Fran. I thinke I heare them. Stand: who's there?

Enter Horatio and Marcellus.
Marcellus, the Riuals of my Watch, bid them make hast.
   Barn. Well, goodnight. If you do meet Horatio and

  Fran. Not a Mouse stirring
   Barn. Haue you had quiet Guard?

And I am sicke at heart
   Fran. For this releefe much thankes: 'Tis bitter cold,

   Bar. 'Tis now strook twelue, get thee to bed Francisco

   Fran. You come most carefully vpon your houre

  Bar. He
   Fran. Barnardo?

   Bar. Long liue the King

your selfe
  Fran. Nay answer me: Stand & vnfold
  Barnardo. Who's there?

Enter Barnardo and Francisco two Centinels.

Actus Primus. Scoena Prima.

The Tragedie of Hamlet

David Reed

and davidr@inconnect.com.  I hope that you enjoy this.
etext possible.  My email address for right now are haradda@aol.com
free to email me those errors.  I wish to make this the best
errors, or if you disagree with my spelling choices please feel
If you find any scanning errors, out and out typos, punctuation

First Folio editions' best pages.
The text I have used was a composite of more than 30 different
incorporated into the printed copies.  This is just the way it is.
continuing the printing run.  The proof run wasn't thrown away but
then proofing the printed copy and correcting the type and then
habit of setting the type and running off a number of copies and
this and other first folio editions.  This is due to the printer's
be differences (other than what I have mentioned above) between
differences between various copies of the first folio.  So there may
Another thing that you should be aware of is that there are textual

purer Shakespeare.
you can delete everything within the brackets if you want a
brackets [] is what I have added.  So if you don't like that
abbreviations as I have come across them.  Everything within
spellings according to this template), typo's and expanded
Geneva Bible and Shakespeare's First Folio and have unified
together a spelling dictionary devised from the spellings of the
printed text.  I have corrected some spelling mistakes (I have put
punctuation, capitalization as close as possible to the
conjoined ae have been changed to ae.  I have left the spelling,
The elongated S's have been changed to small s's and the

come in ASCII to the printed text.
a copy of Shakespeare's first folio and it is as close as I can 
Scanner's Notes: What this is and isn't.  This was taken from


***


Executive Director
Project Gutenberg
Michael S. Hart

of Hamlet.
here is the Project Gutenberg Etext of Shakespeare's The Tragedie 
So. . .with this caveat. . .we have NOT changed the canon errors,

that are "not" errors. . . .
made by our volunteer who prepared this file:  you may see errors
So, please take this into account when reading the comments below

for signing his name with several different spellings.
variety of errors we credit him for, even though he was in/famous
that Shakespeare most likely did not write in nearly as many of a
. . .in great detail. . .and determined from the various changes,
purpose.  To the best of my knowledge he read ALL those available
in England for several months in a glass room constructed for the
assortment of these made available to him by Cambridge University
very high place in the "canon" of Shakespeare.  My father read an
extreme attachment to these errors, and many have accorded them a
have mentioned in other times and places, many "scholars" have an
You will find a lot of these kinds of "errors" in this text, as I

more on a wider selection of characters than they had to.
as print was still quite expensive, and they didn't want to spend
place of some "w"'s, etc.  This was a common practice of the day,
time when they were out of "v"'s. . .possibly having used "vv" in
The answer is that they MAY have packed "liue" into a cliche at a

Shakespeare did not actually write the play in this manner. . . .
above. . .and you may wonder why they did it this way, presuming
that look very odd. . .such as the exchanges of u for v, v for u,
to unpack the cliches, and thus you will see some substitutions
original meaning of the term cliche. . .and thus, being unwilling
or letters they had often packed into a "cliche". . .this is the
As I understand it, the printers often ran out of certain words

***

   Bar. Long liue the King

your selfe
  Fran. Nay answer me: Stand & vnfold
  Barnardo. Who's there?

are presented herein:
been corrected, here are the first few lines of Hamlet, as they
the spelling errors introduced by the printers of the time have
In addition to the notes below, and so you will *NOT* think all

Executive Director's Notes:




Project Gutenberg's Etext of Shakespeare's The Tragedie of Hamlet





*END*THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS*Ver.04.29.93*END*

Association / Carnegie-Mellon University".
you can think of.  Money should be paid to "Project Gutenberg
free copyright licenses, and every other sort of contribution
scanning machines, OCR software, public domain etexts, royalty
The Project gratefully accepts contributions in money, time,
WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?

     your annual (or equivalent periodic) tax return.
     date you prepare (or were legally required to prepare)
     University" within the 60 days following each
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Association/Carnegie-Mellon
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     net profits you derive calculated using the method you
[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Project of 20% of the

     "Small Print!" statement.
[2]  Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this

          or other equivalent proprietary form).
          etext in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at

          OR
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          form by the program that displays the etext (as is
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
     [*]  The etext may be readily converted by the reader at

          indicate hypertext links; OR
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          does *not* contain characters other than those
     [*]  The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable, and

     *EITHER*:
     cessing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     including any form resulting from conversion by word pro-
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     if you wish, distribute this etext in machine readable
     etext or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this

or:
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
You may distribute copies of this etext electronically, or by
DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"

or addition to the etext, or [3] any Defect.
[1] distribution of this etext, [2] alteration, modification,
indirectly from any of the following that you do or cause:
and expense, including legal fees, that arise directly or
officers, members and agents harmless from all liability, cost
You will indemnify and hold the Project, its directors,
INDEMNITY

may have other legal rights.
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or

PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
TO THE ETEXT OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
THIS ETEXT IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS".  NO OTHER

receive it electronically.
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
copy.  If you received it electronically, such person may
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
time to the person you received it from.  If you received it
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
If you discover a Defect in this etext within 90 days of

POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
etext from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext) disclaims all
[1] the Project (and any other party you may receive this
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES

codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.
disk or other etext medium, a computer virus, or computer
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
medium they may be on may contain "Defects".  Among other
works.  Despite these efforts, the Project's etexts and any
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
To create these etexts, the Project expends considerable

under the Project's "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this etext
without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, set forth
distribute it in the United States without permission and
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
Carnegie-Mellon University (the "Project").  Among other
Michael S. Hart through the Project Gutenberg Association at
tm etexts, is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-
ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM ETEXTS

medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.
you got it from.  If you received this etext on a physical
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this etext by
this "Small Print!" statement.  If you do not, you can receive
etext, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS ETEXT

you can distribute copies of this etext if you want to.
disclaims most of our liability to you.  It also tells you how
fault.  So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
your copy of this etext, even if you got it for free from
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here?  You know: lawyers.
***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS**START***


(Three Pages)

**Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor**

***

GET GUTINDEX.ALL [to get a listing of ALL books]
GET GUTINDEX.??  [to get a year's listing of books, e.g., GUTINDEX.99]
get or mget [to get files. . .set bin for zip files]
dir [to see files]
cd etext90 through etext99
cd pub/docs/books/gutenberg
password: your@login
login: anonymous
ftp sunsite.unc.edu

Example FTP session:

Mac users, do NOT point and click, typing works better.

at http://promo.net/pg).
sites are available on 7 continents; mirrors are listed
Web browser to visit a Project Gutenberg mirror (mirror
To go directly to the etext collections, use FTP or any

for a more complete list of our various sites.
is one of our major sites, please email hart@pobox.com,
download our past Newsletters, or subscribe here.  This
to get involved with Project Gutenberg.  You could also
author and by title, and includes information about how
to view http://promo.net/pg.  This site lists Etexts by
To access Project Gutenberg etexts, use any Web browser

******

We would prefer to send you this information by email.

it bounces from prairienet.org, better resend later on. . . .
if your mail bounces from archive.org, I will still see it, if
hart@pobox.com forwards to hart@prairienet.org and archive.org
Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>
When all other email fails. . .try our Executive Director:

Champaign, IL 61825
P. O. Box  2782
Project Gutenberg

For these and other matters, please mail to:

Mellon University).
tax deductible to the extent allowable by law.  (CMU = Carnegie-
All donations should be made to "Project Gutenberg/CMU": and are


We need your donations more than ever!

don't want Project Gutenberg to be so dependent on one person.
more years, so we are looking for something to replace it, as we
assortment of sporadic gifts; this salary is only good for a few
from Michael Hart's salary at Carnegie-Mellon University, and an
manage to get some real funding; currently our funding is mostly
of that goal by the end of 2001, or about 3,333 Etexts unless we
At our revised rates of production, we will reach only one-third

which is only ~5% of the present number of computer users.
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
Files by December 31, 2001.  [10,000 x 100,000,000 = 1 Trillion]
The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away One Trillion Etext

total should reach over 200 billion Etexts given away this year.
If these reach just 10% of the computerized population, then the
files per month, or 432 more Etexts in 1999 for a total of 2000+
million dollars per hour this year as we release thirty-six text
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If our value
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.  This
to get any etext selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
time it takes us, a rather conservative estimate, is fifty hours
We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The

Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)


new copy has at least one byte more or less.
look at the file size will have to do, but we will try to see a
a bug in it that scrambles the date [tried to fix and failed] a
in the first week of the next month.  Since our ftp program has
up to date first edition [xxxxx10x.xxx] please check file sizes
and editing by those who wish to do so.  To be sure you have an
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg Etexts is at
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
Please note:  neither this list nor its contents are final till

of the official release dates, leaving time for better editing.
We are now trying to release all our books one month in advance


of these books in compliance with any particular paper edition.
copyright notice is included.  Therefore, we usually do NOT keep any
all of which are in the Public Domain in the United States, unless a
Project Gutenberg Etexts are usually created from multiple editions,


VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, 0ws2610a.txt
Corrected EDITIONS of our etexts get a new NUMBER, 0ws2611.txt

*****This file should be named 0ws2610.txt or 0ws2610.zip******

*********************The Tragedie of Hamlet*********************
***The Project Gutenberg's Etext of Shakespeare's First Folio***


July, 2000  [Etext #2265]

by William Shakespeare

The Tragedie of Hamlet


further information is included below.  We need your donations.
Information on contacting Project Gutenberg to get Etexts, and

*These Etexts Prepared By Hundreds of Volunteers and Donations*

**Etexts Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**


electronic path open for the next readers.  Do not remove this.
We encourage you to keep this file on your own disk, keeping an
Please take a look at the important information in this header.

the copyright laws for your country before posting these files!!
Copyright laws are changing all over the world, be sure to check


This is our 3rd edition of most of these plays.  See the index.

*********************The Tragedie of Hamlet*********************
***The Project Gutenberg's Etext of Shakespeare's First Folio***
FINIS. THE TRAGEDIE OF MACBETH.


Flourish. Exeunt Omnes.

Whom we inuite, to see vs Crown'd at Scone.
So thankes to all at once, and to each one,
We will performe in measure, time, and place:
That call's vpon vs, by the Grace of Grace,
Tooke off her life. This, and what need full else
Who (as 'tis thought) by selfe and violent hands,
Of this dead Butcher, and his Fiend-like Queene;
Producing forth the cruell Ministers
That fled the Snares of watchfull Tyranny,
As calling home our exil'd Friends abroad,
Which would be planted newly with the time,
In such an Honor nam'd: What's more to do,
Henceforth be Earles, the first that euer Scotland
And make vs euen with you. My Thanes and Kinsmen
Before we reckon with your seuerall loues,
  Mal. We shall not spend a large expence of time,

Flourish.

   All. Haile King of Scotland.

Haile King of Scotland
Whose voyces I desire alowd with mine.
That speake my salutation in their minds:
I see thee compast with thy Kingdomes Pearle,
Th' Vsurpers cursed head: the time is free:
Behold where stands
  Macd. Haile King, for so thou art.

Enter Macduffe, with Macbeths head.
And so God be with him. Here comes newer comfort.
They say he parted well, and paid his score,
   Sey. He's worth no more,

and that Ile spend for him
   Mal. Hee's worth more sorrow,

And so his Knell is knoll'd
I would not wish them to a fairer death:
Had I as many Sonnes, as I haue haires,
   Sey. Why then, Gods Soldier be he:

  Rosse. I, on the Front
   Sey. Had he his hurts before?

It hath no end
Must not be measur'd by his worth, for then
  Rosse. I, and brought off the field: your cause of sorrow
   Sey. Then he is dead?

But like a man he dy'de
In the vnshrinking station where he fought,
The which no sooner had his Prowesse confirm'd
He onely liu'd but till he was a man,
   Rosse. Your son my Lord, ha's paid a souldiers debt,

   Mal. Macduffe is missing, and your Noble Sonne

So great a day as this is cheapely bought
   Sey. Some must go off: and yet by these I see,

  Mal. I would the Friends we misse, were safe arriu'd

Rosse, Thanes, & Soldiers.
Seyward,
Retreat, and Flourish. Enter with Drumme and Colours, Malcolm,

Enter Fighting, and Macbeth slaine.

Exeunt. fighting. Alarums.

And damn'd be him, that first cries hold, enough.
I throw my warlike Shield: Lay on Macduffe,
Yet I will try the last. Before my body,
And thou oppos'd, being of no woman borne,
Though Byrnane wood be come to Dunsinane,
And to be baited with the Rabbles curse.
To kisse the ground before young Malcolmes feet,
   Macb. I will not yeeld

Heere may you see the Tyrant
Painted vpon a pole, and vnder-writ,
Wee'l haue thee, as our rarer Monsters are
And liue to be the shew, and gaze o'th' time.
   Macd. Then yeeld thee Coward,

And breake it to our hope. Ile not fight with thee
That keepe the word of promise to our eare,
That palter with vs in a double sence,
And be these Iugling Fiends no more beleeu'd,
For it hath Cow'd my better part of man:
   Macb. Accursed be that tongue that tels mee so;

Vntimely ript
Tell thee, Macduffe was from his Mothers womb
And let the Angell whom thou still hast seru'd
   Macd. Dispaire thy Charme,

To one of woman borne
I beare a charmed Life, which must not yeeld
Let fall thy blade on vulnerable Crests,
With thy keene Sword impresse, as make me bleed:
As easie may'st thou the intrenchant Ayre
  Macb. Thou loosest labour

Fight: Alarum

Then tearmes can giue thee out.
My voice is in my Sword, thou bloodier Villaine
   Macd. I haue no words,

With blood of thine already
But get thee backe, my soule is too much charg'd
   Macb. Of all men else I haue auoyded thee:

  Macd. Turne Hell-hound, turne

Enter Macduffe.
Do better vpon them.
On mine owne sword? whiles I see liues, the gashes
  Macb. Why should I play the Roman Foole, and dye

Enter Macbeth.

Exeunt. Alarum

   Sey. Enter Sir, the Castle.

That strike beside vs
   Malc. We haue met with Foes

And little is to do
The day almost it selfe professes yours,
The Noble Thanes do brauely in the Warre,
The Tyrants people, on both sides do fight,
  Sey. This way my Lord, the Castles gently rendred:

Enter Malcolme and Seyward.

Exit. Alarums.

And more I begge not.
Seemes bruited. Let me finde him Fortune,
By this great clatter, one of greatest note
I sheath againe vndeeded. There thou should'st be,
Or else my Sword with an vnbattered edge
Are hyr'd to beare their Staues; either thou Macbeth,
I cannot strike at wretched Kernes, whose armes
My Wife and Childrens Ghosts will haunt me still:
If thou beest slaine, and with no stroake of mine,
  Macd. That way the noise is: Tyrant shew thy face,

Alarums. Enter Macduffe.

Enter.
Brandish'd by man that's of a Woman borne.
But Swords I smile at, Weapons laugh to scorne,
  Macb. Thou was't borne of woman;

Fight, and young Seyward slaine.

Ile proue the lye thou speak'st.
   Y.Sey. Thou lyest abhorred Tyrant, with my Sword

   Macb. No: nor more fearefull

More hatefull to mine eare
   Y.Sey. The diuell himselfe could not pronounce a Title

   Macb. My name's Macbeth

Then any is in hell
   Y.Sey. No: though thou call'st thy selfe a hoter name

  Macb. Thou'lt be affraid to heare it
  Y.Sey. What is thy name?

Enter young Seyward.
Am I to feare, or none.
That was not borne of Woman? Such a one
But Beare-like I must fight the course. What's he
  Macb. They haue tied me to a stake, I cannot flye,

Enter Macbeth.

Scena Septima.


Alarums continued.

Exeunt.

Those clamorous Harbingers of Blood, & Death.
   Macd. Make all our Trumpets speak, giue the[m] all breath

Let vs be beaten, if we cannot fight
Do we but finde the Tyrants power to night,
   Sey. Fare you well:

According to our order
Shall take vpon's what else remaines to do,
Leade our first Battell. Worthy Macduffe, and wee
Shall with my Cosin your right Noble Sonne
And shew like those you are: You (worthy Vnkle)
Your leauy Skreenes throw downe,
  Mal. Now neere enough:

with Boughes.
their Army,
Drumme and Colours. Enter Malcolme, Seyward, Macduffe, and

Scena Sexta.

Exeunt.

At least wee'l dye with Harnesse on our backe.
Ring the Alarum Bell, blow Winde, come wracke,
And wish th' estate o'th' world were now vndon.
I 'ginne to be a-weary of the Sun,
There is nor flying hence, nor tarrying here.
If this which he auouches, do's appeare,
Comes toward Dunsinane. Arme, Arme, and out,
Do come to Dunsinane, and now a Wood
That lies like truth. Feare not, till Byrnane Wood
To doubt th' Equiuocation of the Fiend,
I pull in Resolution, and begin
I care not if thou dost for me as much.
Till Famine cling thee: If thy speech be sooth,
Vpon the next Tree shall thou hang aliue
   Macb. If thou speak'st false,

I say, a mouing Groue
Within this three Mile may you see it comming.
   Mes. Let me endure your wrath, if't be not so:

   Macb. Lyar, and Slaue

The Wood began to moue
I look'd toward Byrnane, and anon me thought
   Mes. As I did stand my watch vpon the Hill

   Macb. Well, say sir

But know not how to doo't
I should report that which I say I saw,
   Mes. Gracious my Lord,

Thou com'st to vse thy Tongue: thy Story quickly

Enter a Messenger.
Signifying nothing.
Told by an Ideot, full of sound and fury
And then is heard no more. It is a Tale
That struts and frets his houre vpon the Stage,
Life's but a walking Shadow, a poore Player,
The way to dusty death. Out, out, breefe Candle,
And all our yesterdayes, haue lighted Fooles
To the last Syllable of Recorded time:
Creepes in this petty pace from day to day,
To morrow, and to morrow, and to morrow,
There would haue beene a time for such a word:
   Macb. She should haue dy'de heereafter;

  Sey. The Queene (my Lord) is dead
Cannot once start me. Wherefore was that cry?
Direnesse familiar to my slaughterous thoughts
As life were in't. I haue supt full with horrors,
Would at a dismall Treatise rowze, and stirre
To heare a Night-shrieke, and my Fell of haire
The time ha's beene, my sences would haue cool'd
   Macb. I haue almost forgot the taste of Feares:

  Sey. It is the cry of women, my good Lord

A Cry within of Women.

And beate them backward home. What is that noyse?
We might haue met them darefull, beard to beard,
Were they not forc'd with those that should be ours,
Till Famine and the Ague eate them vp:
Will laugh a Siedge to scorne: Heere let them lye,
The Cry is still, they come: our Castles strength
  Macb. Hang out our Banners on the outward walls,

Enter Macbeth, Seyton, & Souldiers, with Drum and Colours.

Scena Quinta.

Exeunt. marching

Towards which, aduance the warre.
But certaine issue, stroakes must arbitrate,
Thoughts speculatiue, their vnsure hopes relate,
What we shall say we haue, and what we owe:
That will with due decision make vs know
   Sey. The time approaches,

Industrious Souldiership
Attend the true euent, and put we on
   Macd. Let our iust Censures

Whose hearts are absent too
And none serue with him, but constrained things,
Both more and lesse haue giuen him the Reuolt,
For where there is aduantage to be giuen,
   Malc. 'Tis his maine hope:

Our setting downe befor't
Keepes still in Dunsinane, and will indure
   Syw. We learne no other, but the confident Tyrant

   Sold. It shall be done

Erre in report of vs
The numbers of our Hoast, and make discouery
And bear't before him, thereby shall we shadow
   Malc. Let euery Souldier hew him downe a Bough,

  Ment. The wood of Birnane
   Seyw. What wood is this before vs?

   Ment. We doubt it nothing

That Chambers will be safe
  Malc. Cosins, I hope the dayes are neere at hand

Menteth, Cathnes, Angus, and Soldiers Marching.
Seywards Sonne,
Drum and Colours. Enter Malcolme, Seyward, Macduffe,

Scena Quarta.

Exeunt.

Profit againe should hardly draw me heere.
   Doct. Were I from Dunsinane away, and cleere,

Till Birnane Forrest come to Dunsinane
I will not be affraid of Death and Bane,
   Macb. Bring it after me:

Makes vs heare something
  Doct. I my good Lord: your Royall Preparation
Would scowre these English hence: hear'st y of them?
What Rubarb, Cyme, or what Purgatiue drugge
That should applaud againe. Pull't off I say,
I would applaud thee to the very Eccho,
And purge it to a sound and pristine Health,
The Water of my Land, finde her Disease,
Come sir, dispatch. If thou could'st Doctor, cast
Seyton, send out: Doctor, the Thanes flye from me:
Come, put mine Armour on: giue me my Staffe:
   Macb. Throw Physicke to the Dogs, Ile none of it.

Must minister to himselfe
  Doct. Therein the Patient
Which weighes vpon the heart?
Cleanse the stufft bosome, of that perillous stuffe
And with some sweet Obliuious Antidote
Raze out the written troubles of the Braine,
Plucke from the Memory a rooted Sorrow,
Can'st thou not Minister to a minde diseas'd,
   Macb. Cure of that:

That keepe her from her rest
As she is troubled with thicke-comming Fancies
  Doct. Not so sicke my Lord,
How do's your Patient, Doctor?
Hang those that talke of Feare. Giue me mine Armor:
Send out moe Horses, skirre the Country round,
   Macb. Ile put it on:

   Seyt. 'Tis not needed yet

Giue me my Armor
   Macb. Ile fight, till from my bones, my flesh be hackt.

  Sey. All is confirm'd my Lord, which was reported
  Macb. What Newes more?
  Sey. What's your gracious pleasure?

Enter Seyton.
Seyton?
Which the poore heart would faine deny, and dare not.
Curses, not lowd but deepe, Mouth-honor, breath
I must not looke to haue: but in their steed,
As Honor, Loue, Obedience, Troopes of Friends,
And that which should accompany Old-Age,
Is falne into the Seare, the yellow Leafe,
I haue liu'd long enough: my way of life
Will cheere me euer, or dis-eate me now.
When I behold: Seyton, I say, this push
   Macb. Take thy face hence. Seyton, I am sick at hart,

  Ser. The English Force, so please you
Are Counsailers to feare. What Soldiers Whay-face?
Death of thy Soule, those Linnen cheekes of thine
Thou Lilly-liuer'd Boy. What Soldiers, Patch?
   Macb. Go pricke thy face, and ouer-red thy feare

  Ser. Souldiers Sir
   Macb. Geese Villaine?

   Ser. There is ten thousand

Where got'st thou that Goose-looke
The diuell damne thee blacke, thou cream-fac'd Loone:

Enter Seruant.
Shall neuer sagge with doubt, nor shake with feare.
The minde I sway by, and the heart I beare,
And mingle with the English Epicures,
Shall ere haue power vpon thee. Then fly false Thanes,
Feare not Macbeth, no man that's borne of woman
All mortall Consequences, haue pronounc'd me thus:
Was he not borne of woman? The Spirits that know
I cannot taint with Feare. What's the Boy Malcolme?
Till Byrnane wood remoue to Dunsinane,
  Macb. Bring me no more Reports, let them flye all:

Enter Macbeth, Doctor, and Attendants.

Scaena Tertia.


Exeunt. marching.

Make we our March towards Birnan.
To dew the Soueraigne Flower, and drowne the Weeds:
   Lenox. Or so much as it needes,

Each drop of vs
And with him poure we in our Countries purge,
Meet we the Med'cine of the sickly Weale,
To giue Obedience, where 'tis truly ow'd:
   Cath. Well, march we on,

It selfe, for being there
When all that is within him, do's condemne
His pester'd Senses to recoyle, and start,
   Ment. Who then shall blame

Vpon a dwarfish Theefe
Hang loose about him, like a Giants Robe
Nothing in loue: Now do's he feele his Title
Those he commands, moue onely in command,
Now minutely Reuolts vpbraid his Faith-breach:
His secret Murthers sticking on his hands,
   Ang. Now do's he feele

Within the belt of Rule
He cannot buckle his distemper'd cause
Do call it valiant Fury, but for certaine
Some say hee's mad: Others, that lesser hate him,
   Cath. Great Dunsinane he strongly Fortifies:

   Ment. What do's the Tyrant

Protest their first of Manhood
And many vnruffe youths, that euen now
Of all the Gentry; there is Seywards Sonne,
  Len. For certaine Sir, he is not: I haue a File
   Cath. Who knowes if Donalbane be with his brother?

Shall we well meet them, that way are they comming
   Ang. Neere Byrnan wood

Excite the mortified man
Would to the bleeding, and the grim Alarme
Reuenges burne in them: for their deere causes
His Vnkle Seyward, and the good Macduff.
  Ment. The English powre is neere, led on by Malcolm,

Soldiers.
Drum and Colours. Enter Menteth, Cathnes, Angus, Lenox,

Scena Secunda.


Exeunt.

   Gent. Good night good Doctor.

I thinke, but dare not speake
My minde she ha's mated, and amaz'd my sight.
And still keepe eyes vpon her: So goodnight,
Remoue from her the meanes of all annoyance,
God, God forgiue vs all. Looke after her,
More needs she the Diuine, then the Physitian:
To their deafe pillowes will discharge their Secrets:
Do breed vnnaturall troubles: infected mindes
   Doct. Foule whisp'rings are abroad: vnnaturall deeds

  Gent. Directly
  Doct. Will she go now to bed?

Exit Lady.

done, cannot be vndone. To bed, to bed, to bed.
Come, come, come, come, giue me your hand: What's
  Lady. To bed, to bed: there's knocking at the gate:
   Doct. Euen so?

he cannot come out on's graue
looke not so pale: I tell you yet againe Banquo's buried;
   Lad. Wash your hands, put on your Night-Gowne,

dyed holily in their beds
knowne those which haue walkt in their sleep, who haue
   Doct. This disease is beyond my practise: yet I haue

   Gent. Pray God it be sir

   Doct. Well, well, well

for the dignity of the whole body
   Gent. I would not haue such a heart in my bosome,

   Doct. What a sigh is there? The hart is sorely charg'd

Oh, oh, oh
of Arabia will not sweeten this little hand.
   La. Heere's the smell of the blood still: all the perfumes

of that: Heauen knowes what she ha's knowne
   Gent. She ha's spoke what shee should not, I am sure

You haue knowne what you should not
   Doct. Go too, go too:

my Lord, no more o'that: you marre all with this starting
What will these hands ne're be cleane? No more o'that
  Lad. The Thane of Fife, had a wife: where is she now?
   Doct. Do you marke that?

blood in him
would haue thought the olde man to haue had so much
it, when none can call our powre to accompt: yet who
a Souldier, and affear'd? what need we feare? who knowes
then 'tis time to doo't: Hell is murky. Fye, my Lord, fie,
   La. Out damned spot: out I say. One: Two: Why

from her, to satisfie my remembrance the more strongly
   Doct. Heark, she speaks, I will set downe what comes

   Lad. Yet heere's a spot

this a quarter of an houre
thus washing her hands: I haue knowne her continue in
   Gent. It is an accustom'd action with her, to seeme

Looke how she rubbes her hands
   Doct. What is it she do's now?

   Gent. I, but their sense are shut

   Doct. You see her eyes are open

'tis her command
  Gent. Why it stood by her: she ha's light by her continually,
   Doct. How came she by that light?

my life fast asleepe: obserue her, stand close
Lo you, heere she comes: This is her very guise, and vpon

Enter Lady, with a Taper.
to confirme my speech.
   Gent. Neither to you, nor any one, hauing no witnesse

   Doct. You may to me, and 'tis most meet you should

  Gent. That Sir, which I will not report after her
her say?
actuall performances, what (at any time) haue you heard
In this slumbry agitation, besides her walking, and other
once the benefit of sleep, and do the effects of watching.
   Doct. A great perturbation in Nature, to receyue at

to bed; yet all this while in a most fast sleepe
write vpon't, read it, afterwards Seale it, and againe returne
her, vnlocke her Closset, take foorth paper, folde it,
seene her rise from her bed, throw her Night-Gown vppon
  Gent. Since his Maiesty went into the Field, I haue
walk'd?
perceiue no truth in your report. When was it shee last
  Doct. I haue too Nights watch'd with you, but can

Enter a Doctor of Physicke, and a Wayting Gentlewoman.

Actus Quintus. Scena Prima.

Exeunt.

The Night is long, that neuer findes the Day.
Put on their Instruments: Receiue what cheere you may,
Is ripe for shaking, and the Powres aboue
Our lacke is nothing but our leaue. Macbeth
Come go we to the King, our Power is ready,
   Mal. This time goes manly:

Heauen forgiue him too
Within my Swords length set him, if he scape
Bring thou this Fiend of Scotland, and my selfe
Cut short all intermission: Front to Front,
And Braggart with my tongue. But gentle Heauens,
   Macd. O I could play the woman with mine eyes,

Conuert to anger: blunt not the heart, enrage it
   Mal. Be this the Whetstone of your sword, let griefe

Fell slaughter on their soules: Heauen rest them now
Not for their owne demerits, but for mine
They were all strooke for thee: Naught that I am,
And would not take their part? Sinfull Macduff,
That were most precious to me: Did heauen looke on,
I cannot but remember such things were
But I must also feele it as a man;
   Macd. I shall do so:

  Malc. Dispute it like a man
At one fell swoope?
What, All my pretty Chickens, and their Damme
Did you say All? Oh Hell-Kite! All?
   Macd. He ha's no Children. All my pretty ones?

To cure this deadly greefe
Let's make vs Med'cines of our great Reuenge,
   Malc. Be comforted.

  Rosse. I haue said
   Macd. And I must be from thence? My wife kil'd too?

  Ro. Wife, Children, Seruants, all that could be found
   Macd. My Children too?

Whispers the o're-fraught heart, and bids it breake
Giue sorrow words; the griefe that do's not speake,
What man, ne're pull your hat vpon your browes:
   Malc. Mercifull Heauen:

To adde the death of you
Were on the Quarry of these murther'd Deere
Sauagely slaughter'd: To relate the manner
   Rosse. Your Castle is surpriz'd: your Wife, and Babes

   Macd. Humh: I guesse at it

that euer yet they heard
Which shall possesse them with the heauiest sound
   Rosse. Let not your eares dispise my tongue for euer,

Keepe it not from me, quickly let me haue it
   Macd. If it be mine

Pertaines to you alone
But in it shares some woe, though the maine part
  Rosse. No minde that's honest
Due to some single brest?
The generall cause, or is it a Fee-griefe
   Macd. What concerne they,

Where hearing should not latch them
That would be howl'd out in the desert ayre,
This comfort with the like. But I haue words
   Rosse. Would I could answer

That Christendome giues out
An older, and a better Souldier, none
Lent vs good Seyward, and ten thousand men,
We are comming thither: Gracious England hath
   Malc. Bee't their comfort

To doffe their dire distresses
Would create Soldiours, make our women fight,
Now is the time of helpe: your eye in Scotland
For that I saw the Tyrants Power a-foot.
Which was to my beleefe witnest the rather,
Of many worthy Fellowes, that were out,
Which I haue heauily borne, there ran a Rumour
  Rosse. When I came hither to transport the Tydings
  Macd. Be not a niggard of your speech: How gos't?
  Rosse. No, they were wel at peace, when I did leaue 'em
   Macd. The Tyrant ha's not batter'd at their peace?

  Rosse. Well too
   Macd. And all my Children?

  Rosse. Why well
   Macd. How do's my Wife?

Each minute teemes a new one
  Rosse. That of an houres age, doth hisse the speaker,
   Malc. What's the newest griefe?

   Macd. Oh Relation; too nice, and yet too true

Dying, or ere they sicken
Expire before the Flowers in their Caps,
Is there scarse ask'd for who, and good mens liues
A Moderne extasie: The Deadmans knell,
Are made, not mark'd: Where violent sorrow seemes
Where sighes, and groanes, and shrieks that rent the ayre
But who knowes nothing, is once seene to smile:
Be call'd our Mother, but our Graue; where nothing
Almost affraid to know it selfe. It cannot
  Rosse. Alas poore Countrey,
   Macd. Stands Scotland where it did?

   Rosse. Sir, Amen

The meanes that makes vs Strangers
   Malc. I know him now. Good God betimes remoue

   Macd. My euer gentle Cozen, welcome hither

   Malc. My Countryman: but yet I know him not

  Macd. See who comes heere

Enter Rosse.
That speake him full of Grace.
And sundry Blessings hang about his Throne,
He hath a heauenly guift of Prophesie,
The healing Benediction. With this strange vertue,
To the succeeding Royalty he leaues
Put on with holy Prayers, and 'tis spoken
Hanging a golden stampe about their neckes,
The meere dispaire of Surgery, he cures,
All swolne and Vlcerous, pittifull to the eye,
Himselfe best knowes: but strangely visited people
I haue seene him do: How he solicites heauen
Which often since my heere remaine in England,
A most myraculous worke in this good King,
  Mal. Tis call'd the Euill.
   Macd. What's the Disease he meanes?

  Mal. I thanke you Doctor

Enter.
They presently amend.
Such sanctity hath Heauen giuen his hand,
The great assay of Art. But at his touch,
That stay his Cure: their malady conuinces
  Doct. I Sir: there are a crew of wretched Soules
I pray you?
  Mal. Well, more anon. Comes the King forth

Enter a Doctor.
'Tis hard to reconcile.
  Macd. Such welcome, and vnwelcom things at once
Be like our warranted Quarrell. Why are you silent?
Now wee'l together, and the chance of goodnesse
Already at a point, was setting foorth:
Old Seyward with ten thousand warlike men
Whither indeed, before they heere approach
Is thine, and my poore Countries to command:
Was this vpon my selfe. What I am truly
No lesse in truth then life. My first false speaking
The Deuill to his Fellow, and delight
At no time broke my Faith, would not betray
Scarsely haue coueted what was mine owne.
Vnknowne to Woman, neuer was forsworne,
For strangers to my Nature. I am yet
The taints, and blames I laide vpon my selfe,
Vnspeake mine owne detraction. Heere abiure
I put my selfe to thy Direction, and
Deale betweene thee and me; For euen now
From ouer-credulous hast: but God aboue
Into his power: and modest Wisedome pluckes me
By many of these traines, hath sought to win me
To thy good Truth, and Honor. Diuellish Macbeth,
Wip'd the blacke Scruples, reconcil'd my thoughts
Childe of integrity, hath from my soule
   Mal. Macduff, this Noble passion

Thy hope ends heere
Hath banish'd me from Scotland. O my Brest,
These Euils thou repeat'st vpon thy selfe,
Dy'de euery day she liu'd. Fare thee well,
Oftner vpon her knees, then on her feet,
Was a most Sainted-King: the Queene that bore thee,
And do's blaspheme his breed? Thy Royall Father
By his owne Interdiction stands accust,
Since that the truest Issue of thy Throne
When shalt thou see thy wholsome dayes againe?
With an vntitled Tyrant, bloody Sceptred,
   Mac. Fit to gouern? No not to liue. O Natio[n] miserable!

I am as I haue spoken
   Mal. If such a one be fit to gouerne, speake:

   Macd. O Scotland, Scotland

All vnity on earth
Vprore the vniuersall peace, confound
Poure the sweet Milke of Concord, into Hell,
Acting it many wayes. Nay, had I powre, I should
In the diuision of each seuerall Crime,
I haue no rellish of them, but abound
Deuotion, Patience, Courage, Fortitude,
Bounty, Perseuerance, Mercy, Lowlinesse,
As Iustice, Verity, Temp'rance, Stablenesse,
   Mal. But I haue none. The King-becoming Graces,

With other Graces weigh'd
Of your meere Owne. All these are portable,
Scotland hath Foysons, to fill vp your will
The Sword of our slaine Kings: yet do not feare,
Then Summer-seeming Lust: and it hath bin
stickes deeper: growes with more pernicious roote
   Macd. This Auarice

Destroying them for wealth
Quarrels vniust against the Good and Loyall,
To make me hunger more, that I should forge
And my more-hauing, would be as a Sawce
Desire his Iewels, and this others House,
I should cut off the Nobles for their Lands,
A stanchlesse Auarice, that were I King,
In my most ill-composd Affection, such
   Mal. With this, there growes

Finding it so inclinde
As will to Greatnesse dedicate themselues,
That Vulture in you, to deuoure so many
We haue willing Dames enough: there cannot be
And yet seeme cold. The time you may so hoodwinke:
Conuey your pleasures in a spacious plenty,
To take vpon you what is yours: you may
And fall of many Kings. But feare not yet
Th' vntimely emptying of the happy Throne,
In Nature is a Tyranny: It hath beene
   Macd. Boundlesse intemperance

Then such an one to reigne
That did oppose my will. Better Macbeth,
All continent Impediments would ore-beare
The Cesterne of my Lust, and my Desire
Your Matrons, and your Maides, could not fill vp
In my Voluptuousnesse: Your Wiues, your Daughters,
That ha's a name. But there's no bottome, none
Sodaine, Malicious, smacking of euery sinne
Luxurious, Auaricious, False, Deceitfull,
   Mal. I grant him Bloody,

In euils, to top Macbeth
Of horrid Hell, can come a Diuell more damn'd
   Macd. Not in the Legions

With my confinelesse harmes
Esteeme him as a Lambe, being compar'd
Will seeme as pure as Snow, and the poore State
That when they shall be open'd, blacke Macbeth
All the particulars of Vice so grafted,
  Mal. It is my selfe I meane: in whom I know
   Macd. What should he be?

By him that shall succeede
More suffer, and more sundry wayes then euer,
Shall haue more vices then it had before,
Or weare it on my Sword; yet my poore Country
When I shall treade vpon the Tyrants head,
Of goodly thousands. But for all this,
And heere from gracious England haue I offer
There would be hands vplifted in my right:
Is added to her wounds. I thinke withall,
It weepes, it bleeds, and each new day a gash
I thinke our Country sinkes beneath the yoake,
I speake not as in absolute feare of you:
   Mal. Be not offended:

And the rich East to boot
For the whole Space that's in the Tyrants Graspe,
I would not be the Villaine that thou think'st,
The Title, is affear'd. Far thee well Lord,
For goodnesse dare not check thee: wear y thy wrongs,
Great Tyrrany, lay thou thy basis sure,
   Macd. Bleed, bleed poore Country,

What euer I shall thinke
But mine owne Safeties: you may be rightly iust,
Let not my Iealousies, be your Dishonors,
Without leaue-taking. I pray you,
Those precious Motiues, those strong knots of Loue,
Why in that rawnesse left you Wife, and Childe?
Where I did finde my doubts.
   Malc. Perchance euen there

   Macd. I haue lost my Hopes

Yet Grace must still looke so
Though all things foule, would wear the brows of grace
Angels are bright still, though the brightest fell.
That which you are, my thoughts cannot transpose;
In an Imperiall charge. But I shall craue your pardon:
A good and vertuous Nature may recoyle
   Malc. But Macbeth is.

   Macd. I am not treacherous

T' appease an angry God
To offer vp a weake, poore innocent Lambe
You may discerne of him through me, and wisedome
He hath not touch'd you yet. I am yong, but something
Was once thought honest: you haue lou'd him well,
This Tyrant, whose sole name blisters our tongues,
What you haue spoke, it may be so perchance.
As I shall finde the time to friend: I wil.
What know, beleeue; and what I can redresse,
   Mal. What I beleeue, Ile waile;

Like Syllable of Dolour
As if it felt with Scotland, and yell'd out
Strike heauen on the face, that it resounds
New Widdowes howle, new Orphans cry, new sorowes
Bestride our downfall Birthdome: each new Morne,
Hold fast the mortall Sword: and like good men,
   Macd. Let vs rather

Weepe our sad bosomes empty
  Mal. Let vs seeke out some desolate shade, & there

Enter Malcolme and Macduffe.

Scaena Tertia.


Exit crying Murther.

Run away I pray you.
  Son. He ha's kill'd me Mother,
Yong fry of Treachery?
   Mur. What you Egge?

   Son. Thou ly'st thou shagge-ear'd Villaine

   Mur. He's a Traitor

Where such as thou may'st finde him
  Wife. I hope in no place so vnsanctified,
  Mur. Where is your Husband?

Enter Murtherers.
What are these faces?
To say I haue done no harme?
Do I put vp that womanly defence,
Accounted dangerous folly. Why then (alas)
Is often laudable, to do good sometime
I am in this earthly world: where to do harme
I haue done no harme. But I remember now
  Wife. Whether should I flye?

Exit Messenger

I dare abide no longer.
Which is too nie your person. Heauen preserue you,
To do worse to you, were fell Cruelty,
To fright you thus. Me thinkes I am too sauage:
Be not found heere: Hence with your little ones
If you will take a homely mans aduice,
I doubt some danger do's approach you neerely.
Though in your state of Honor I am perfect;
  Mes. Blesse you faire Dame: I am not to you known,

Enter a Messenger.
   Wife. Poore pratler, how thou talk'st?

haue a new Father
would not, it were a good signe, that I should quickely
  Son. If he were dead, youl'd weepe for him: if you
But how wilt thou do for a Father?
   Wife. Now God helpe thee, poore Monkie:

and hang vp them
are Lyars and Swearers enow, to beate the honest men,
   Son. Then the Liars and Swearers are Fools: for there

  Wife. Why, the honest men
   Son. Who must hang them?

  Wife. Euery one
   Son. And must they all be hang'd, that swear and lye?

And must be hang'd
   Wife. Euery one that do's so, is a Traitor,

   Son. And be all Traitors, that do so

  Wife. Why one that sweares, and lyes
   Son. What is a Traitor?

  Wife. I, that he was
   Son. Was my Father a Traitor, Mother?

And yet I'faith with wit enough for thee
   Wife. Thou speak'st withall thy wit,

   Son. Then you'l by 'em to sell againe

  Wife. Why I can buy me twenty at any Market
  Son. Nay how will you do for a Husband?
How wilt thou do for a Father?
   Wife. Yes, he is dead:

My Father is not dead for all your saying
Poore Birds they are not set for:
   Son. Why should I Mother?

The Pitfall, nor the Gin
Thou'dst neuer Feare the Net, nor Lime,
   Wife. Poore Bird,

  Son. With what I get I meane, and so do they
   Wife. What with Wormes, and Flyes?

  Son. As Birds do Mother
And what will you do now? How will you liue?
  Wife. Sirra, your Fathers dead,

Exit Rosse.

I take my leaue at once.
It would be my disgrace, and your discomfort.
   Rosse. I am so much a Foole, should I stay longer

And yet hee's Father-lesse
   Wife. Father'd he is,

Blessing vpon you
To what they were before. My pretty Cosine,
Things at the worst will cease, or else climbe vpward,
Shall not be long but Ile be heere againe:
Each way, and moue. I take my leaue of you:
But floate vpon a wilde and violent Sea
From what we feare, yet know not what we feare,
And do not know our selues: when we hold Rumor
But cruell are the times, when we are Traitors
The fits o'th' Season. I dare not speake much further,
He is Noble, Wise, Iudicious, and best knowes
I pray you schoole your selfe. But for your Husband,
   Rosse. My deerest Cooz,

So runnes against all reason
As little is the Wisedome, where the flight
All is the Feare, and nothing is the Loue;
Her yong ones in her Nest, against the Owle:
(The most diminitiue of Birds) will fight,
He wants the naturall touch. For the poore Wren
From whence himselfe do's flye? He loues vs not,
His Mansion, and his Titles, in a place
   Wife. Wisedom? to leaue his wife, to leaue his Babes,

Whether it was his wisedome, or his feare
   Rosse. You know not

Our feares do make vs Traitors
His flight was madnesse: when our Actions do not,
   Wife. He had none:

  Rosse. You must haue patience Madam
  Wife. What had he done, to make him fly the Land?

Enter Macduffes Wife, her Son, and Rosse.

Scena Secunda.

Exeunt.

Come bring me where they are.
But no more sights. Where are these Gentlemen?
This deed Ile do, before this purpose coole,
That trace him in his Line. No boasting like a Foole,
His Wife, his Babes, and all vnfortunate Soules
Seize vpon Fife; giue to th' edge o'th' Sword
The Castle of Macduff, I will surprize.
To Crown my thoughts with Acts: be it thoght & done:
The firstlings of my hand. And euen now
The very firstlings of my heart shall be
Vnlesse the deed go with it. From this moment,
The flighty purpose neuer is o're-tooke
   Macb. Time, thou anticipat'st my dread exploits:

  Len. I, my good Lord
   Macb. Fled to England?

Macduff is fled to England
  Len. 'Tis two or three my Lord, that bring you word:
The gallopping of Horse. Who was't came by?
And damn'd all those that trust them. I did heare
   Macb. Infected be the Ayre whereon they ride,

  Lenox. No indeed my Lord
   Macb. Came they not by you?

  Lenox. No my Lord
   Macb. Saw you the Weyard Sisters?

  Lenox. What's your Graces will

Enter Lenox.
Come in, without there.
Stand aye accursed in the Kalender.
Let this pernitious houre,
  Macb. Where are they? Gone?

Musicke. The Witches Dance, and vanish.

Our duties, did his welcome pay.
That this great King may kindly say,
While you performe your Antique round:
Ile Charme the Ayre to giue a sound,
And shew the best of our delights.
Come Sisters, cheere we vp his sprights,
Stands Macbeth thus amazedly?
  1 I Sir, all this is so. But why
And points at them for his. What? is this so?
For the Blood-bolter'd Banquo smiles vpon me,
Horrible sight: Now I see 'tis true,
That two-fold Balles, and trebble Scepters carry.
Which shewes me many more: and some I see,
And yet the eighth appeares, who beares a glasse,
Another yet? A seauenth? Ile see no more:
What will the Line stretch out to'th' cracke of Doome?
Why do you shew me this? - A fourth? Start eyes!
A third, is like the former. Filthy Hagges,
Thou other Gold-bound-brow, is like the first:
Thy Crowne do's seare mine Eye-bals. And thy haire
  Macb. Thou art too like the Spirit of Banquo: Down:

A shew of eight Kings, and Banquo last, with a glasse in his hand.

Come like shadowes, so depart.
   All. Shew his Eyes, and greeue his Hart,

   3 Shew

   2 Shew

  1 Shew

Hoboyes

Why sinkes that Caldron? & what noise is this?
And an eternall Curse fall on you: Let me know.
   Macb. I will be satisfied. Deny me this,

  All. Seeke to know no more
Reigne in this Kingdome?
Can tell so much: Shall Banquo's issue euer
Throbs to know one thing: Tell me, if your Art
To time, and mortall Custome. Yet my Hart
Shall liue the Lease of Nature, pay his breath
Of Byrnan rise, and our high plac'd Macbeth
Rebellious dead, rise neuer till the Wood
Vnfixe his earth-bound Root? Sweet boadments, good:
Who can impresse the Forrest, bid the Tree
  Macb. That will neuer bee:

Descend.

Shall come against him.
Great Byrnam Wood, to high Dunsmane Hill
Macbeth shall neuer vanquish'd be, vntill
Who chafes, who frets, or where Conspirers are:
   3 Appar. Be Lyon metled, proud, and take no care:

  All. Listen, but speake not too't
And top of Soueraignty?
And weares vpon his Baby-brow, the round
What is this, that rises like the issue of a King,

Thunder 3 Apparation, a Childe Crowned, with a Tree in his hand.

And sleepe in spight of Thunder.
That I may tell pale-hearted Feare, it lies;
And take a Bond of Fate: thou shalt not liue,
But yet Ile make assurance: double sure,
  Mac. Then liue Macduffe: what need I feare of thee?

Descends.

Shall harme Macbeth.
The powre of man: For none of woman borne
Laugh to scorne
   Appar. Be bloody, bold, & resolute:

   Macb. Had I three eares, Il'd heare thee

  2 Appar. Macbeth, Macbeth, Macbeth

Thunder. 2 Apparition, a Bloody Childe.

More potent then the first.
   1 He will not be commanded: heere's another

Thou hast harp'd my feare aright. But one word more
  Macb. What ere thou art, for thy good caution, thanks

He Descends.

Beware the Thane of Fife: dismisse me. Enough.
Beware Macduffe,
   1 Appar. Macbeth, Macbeth, Macbeth:

Heare his speech, but say thou nought
   1 He knowes thy thought:

  Macb. Tell me, thou vnknowne power

Thunder. 1. Apparation, an Armed Head.
Thy Selfe and Office deaftly show.
   All. Come high or low:

Into the Flame
From the Murderers Gibbet, throw
Her nine Farrow: Greaze that's sweaten
   1 Powre in Sowes blood, that hath eaten

   Macb. Call 'em: let me see 'em

Or from our Masters
   1 Say, if th'hadst rather heare it from our mouthes,

   3 Wee'l answer

   2 Demand

   1 Speake

To what I aske you
Euen till destruction sicken: Answer me
Of Natures Germaine, tumble altogether,
Their heads to their Foundations: Though the treasure
Though Pallaces, and Pyramids do slope
Though Castles topple on their Warders heads:
Though bladed Corne be lodg'd, & Trees blown downe,
Confound and swallow Nauigation vp:
Against the Churches: Though the yesty Waues
Though you vntye the Windes, and let them fight
(How ere you come to know it) answer me:
   Macb. I coniure you, by that which you Professe,

  All. A deed without a name
What is't you do?
  Macb. How now you secret, black, & midnight Hags?

Enter Macbeth.
Open Lockes, who euer knockes.
Something wicked this way comes:
  2 By the pricking of my Thumbes,

Musicke and a Song. Blacke Spirits, &c.

Inchanting all that you put in.
Like Elues and Fairies in a Ring,
And now about the Cauldron sing
And euery one shall share i'th' gaines:
  Hec. O well done: I commend your paines,

Enter Hecat, and the other three Witches.
Then the Charme is firme and good.
   2 Coole it with a Baboones blood,

Fire burne, and Cauldron bubble
   All. Double, double, toyle and trouble,

For th' Ingredience of our Cawdron
Adde thereto a Tigers Chawdron,
Make the Grewell thicke, and slab.
Ditch-deliuer'd by a Drab,
Finger of Birth-strangled Babe,
Nose of Turke, and Tartars lips:
Sliuer'd in the Moones Ecclipse:
Gall of Goate, and Slippes of Yew,
Liuer of Blaspheming Iew,
Roote of Hemlocke, digg'd i'th' darke:
Of the rauin'd salt Sea sharke:
Witches Mummey, Maw, and Gulfe
   3 Scale of Dragon, Tooth of Wolfe,

Fire burne, and Cauldron bubble
   All. Double, double, toyle and trouble,

Like a Hell-broth, boyle and bubble
For a Charme of powrefull trouble,
Lizards legge, and Howlets wing:
Adders Forke, and Blinde-wormes Sting,
Wooll of Bat, and Tongue of Dogge:
Eye of Newt, and Toe of Frogge,
In the Cauldron boyle and bake:
   2 Fillet of a Fenny Snake,

Fire burne, and Cauldron bubble
   All. Double, double, toile and trouble;

Boyle thou first i'th' charmed pot
Sweltred Venom sleeping got,
Dayes and Nights, ha's thirty one:
Toad, that vnder cold stone,
In the poysond Entrailes throw
   1 Round about the Caldron go:

   3 Harpier cries, 'tis time, 'tis time

   2 Thrice, and once the Hedge-Pigge whin'd

  1 Thrice the brinded Cat hath mew'd

Thunder. Enter the three Witches.

Actus Quartus. Scena Prima.

Exeunt.

   Lord. Ile send my Prayers with him.

Vnder a hand accurs'd
May soone returne to this our suffering Country,
His Message ere he come, that a swift blessing
Flye to the Court of England, and vnfold
His wisedome can prouide. Some holy Angell
Aduise him to a Caution, t' hold what distance
   Lenox. And that well might

That clogges me with this Answer
And hums; as who should say, you'l rue the time
The clowdy Messenger turnes me his backe,
  Lord. He did: and with an absolute Sir, not I
   Len. Sent he to Macduffe?

Prepares for some attempt of Warre
Hath so exasperate their King, that hee
All which we pine for now. And this report
Do faithfull Homage, and receiue free Honors,
Free from our Feasts, and Banquets bloody kniues;
Giue to our Tables meate, sleepe to our Nights:
To ratifie the Worke) we may againe
That by the helpe of these (with him aboue)
To wake Northumberland, and warlike Seyward,
Is gone, to pray the Holy King, vpon his ayd
Takes from his high respect. Thither Macduffe
That the maleuolence of Fortune, nothing
Of the most Pious Edward, with such grace,
Liues in the English Court, and is receyu'd
(From whom this Tyrant holds the due of Birth)
  Lord. The Sonnes of Duncane
Where he bestowes himselfe?
Macduffe liues in disgrace. Sir, can you tell
His presence at the Tyrants Feast, I heare
But peace; for from broad words, and cause he fayl'd
What 'twere to kill a Father: So should Fleans.
(As, and't please Heauen he shall not) they should finde
That had he Duncans Sonnes vnder his Key,
He ha's borne all things well, and I do thinke,
To heare the men deny't. So that I say,
For 'twould haue anger'd any heart aliue
Was not that Nobly done? I, and wisely too:
That were the Slaues of drinke, and thralles of sleepe?
In pious rage, the two delinquents teare,
How it did greeue Macbeth? Did he not straight
To kill their gracious Father? Damned Fact,
It was for Malcolme, and for Donalbane
Who cannot want the thought, how monstrous
For Fleans fled: Men must not walke too late.
Whom you may say (if't please you) Fleans kill'd,
And the right valiant Banquo walk'd too late,
Was pittied of Macbeth: marry he was dead:
Things haue bin strangely borne. The gracious Duncan
Which can interpret farther: Onely I say
Haue but hit your Thoughts
  Lenox. My former Speeches,

Enter Lenox, and another Lord.

Scaena Sexta.


Exeunt.

Backe againe.
  1 Come, let's make hast, shee'l soone be

Sing within. Come away, come away, &c.

Sits in Foggy cloud, and stayes for me.
Hearke, I am call'd: my little Spirit see

Musicke, and a Song.

Is Mortals cheefest Enemie.
And you all know, Security
His hopes 'boue Wisedome, Grace, and Feare:
He shall spurne Fate, scorne Death, and beare
Shall draw him on to his Confusion.
As by the strength of their illusion,
Shall raise such Artificiall Sprights,
And that distill'd by Magicke slights,
Ile catch it ere it come to ground;
There hangs a vap'rous drop, profound,
Vpon the Corner of the Moone
Great businesse must be wrought ere Noone.
Vnto a dismall, and a Fatall end.
I am for th' Ayre: This night Ile spend
Your Charmes, and euery thing beside;
Your Vessels, and your Spels prouide,
Will come, to know his Destinie.
Meete me i'th' Morning: thither he
And at the pit of Acheron
But make amends now: Get you gon,
Loues for his owne ends, not for you.
Spightfull, and wrathfull, who (as others do)
Hath bene but for a wayward Sonne,
And which is worse, all you haue done
Or shew the glory of our Art?
Was neuer call'd to beare my part,
The close contriuer of all harmes,
And I the Mistris of your Charmes,
In Riddles, and Affaires of death;
To Trade, and Trafficke with Macbeth,
Sawcy, and ouer-bold, how did you dare
  Hec. Haue I not reason (Beldams) as you are?
  1. Why how now Hecat, you looke angerly?

Thunder. Enter the three Witches, meeting Hecat.

Scena Quinta.


Exeunt.

We are yet but yong indeed.
Is the initiate feare, that wants hard vse:
   Macb. Come, wee'l to sleepe: My strange & self-abuse

   La. You lacke the season of all Natures, sleepe

Which must be acted, ere they may be scand
Strange things I haue in head, that will to hand,
Returning were as tedious as go ore:
Stept in so farre, that should I wade no more,
All causes shall giue way. I am in blood
By the worst meanes, the worst, for mine owne good,
More shall they speake: for now I am bent to know
(And betimes I will) to the weyard Sisters.
I keepe a Seruant Feed. I will to morrow
There's not a one of them but in his house
  Macb. I heare it by the way: But I will send:
   La. Did you send to him Sir?

At our great bidding
   Macb. How say'st thou that Macduff denies his person

  La. Almost at oddes with morning, which is which
The secret'st man of Blood. What is the night?
By Maggot Pyes, & Choughes, & Rookes brought forth
Augures, and vnderstood Relations, haue
Stones haue beene knowne to moue, & Trees to speake:
Blood will haue Blood:
  Macb. It will haue blood they say:

Exit Lords.

   La. A kinde goodnight to all.

Attend his Maiesty
   Len. Good night, and better health

But go at once
Stand not vpon the order of your going,
Question enrages him: at once, goodnight.
  La. I pray you speake not: he growes worse & worse
   Rosse. What sights, my Lord?

When mine is blanch'd with feare
And keepe the naturall Rubie of your Cheekes,
When now I thinke you can behold such sights,
Euen to the disposition that I owe,
Without our speciall wonder? You make me strange
And ouercome vs like a Summers Clowd,
   Macb. Can such things be,

Broke the good meeting, with most admir'd disorder
   La. You haue displac'd the mirth,

I am a man againe: pray you sit still
Vnreall mock'ry hence. Why so, being gone
The Baby of a Girle. Hence horrible shadow,
If trembling I inhabit then, protest mee
And dare me to the Desart with thy Sword:
Shall neuer tremble. Or be aliue againe,
Take any shape but that, and my firme Nerues
The arm'd Rhinoceros, or th' Hircan Tiger,
Approach thou like the rugged Russian Beare,
   Macb. What man dare, I dare:

Onely it spoyles the pleasure of the time
But as a thing of Custome: 'Tis no other,
   La. Thinke of this good Peeres

Which thou dost glare with
Thou hast no speculation in those eyes
Thy bones are marrowlesse, thy blood is cold:
   Mac. Auant, & quit my sight, let the earth hide thee:

   Lords. Our duties, and the pledge

And all to all
Would he were heere: to all, and him we thirst,
And to our deere Friend Banquo, whom we misse:
I drinke to th' generall ioy o'th' whole Table,

Enter Ghost.
Then Ile sit downe: Giue me some Wine, fill full:
To those that know me. Come, loue and health to all,
I haue a strange infirmity, which is nothing
Do not muse at me my most worthy Friends,
   Macb. I do forget:

Your Noble Friends do lacke you
   La. My worthy Lord

Then such a murther is
And push vs from our stooles. This is more strange
With twenty mortall murthers on their crownes,
And there an end: But now they rise againe
That when the Braines were out, the man would dye,
Too terrible for the eare. The times has bene,
I, and since too, Murthers haue bene perform'd
Ere humane Statute purg'd the gentle Weale:
   Macb. Blood hath bene shed ere now, i'th' olden time

   La. Fie for shame

   Macb. If I stand heere, I saw him

   La. What? quite vnmann'd in folly

Shall be the Mawes of Kytes
Those that we bury, backe; our Monuments
If Charnell houses, and our Graues must send
Why what care I, if thou canst nod, speake too.
Behold, looke, loe, how say you:
   Macb. Prythee see there:

You looke but on a stoole
Why do you make such faces? When all's done
Authoriz'd by her Grandam: shame it selfe,
A womans story, at a Winters fire
(Impostors to true feare) would well become
Led you to Duncan. O, these flawes and starts
This is the Ayre-drawne-Dagger which you said
This is the very painting of your feare:
   La. O proper stuffe:

Which might appall the Diuell
  Macb. I, and a bold one, that dare looke on that
Feed, and regard him not. Are you a man?
You shall offend him, and extend his Passion,
He will againe be well. If much you note him
The fit is momentary, vpon a thought
And hath beene from his youth. Pray you keepe Seat,
   Lady. Sit worthy Friends: my Lord is often thus,

   Rosse. Gentlemen rise, his Highnesse is not well

Thy goary lockes at me
  Macb. Thou canst not say I did it: neuer shake
  Lords. What, my good Lord?
  Macb. Which of you haue done this?
What is't that moues your Highnesse?
  Lenox. Heere my good Lord.
   Macb. Where?

   Lenox. Heere is a place reseru'd Sir

  Macb. The Table's full
To grace vs with your Royall Company?
Layes blame vpon his promise. Pleas't your Highnesse
   Rosse. His absence (Sir)

Then pitty for Mischance
Who, may I rather challenge for vnkindnesse,
Were the grac'd person of our Banquo present:
   Macb. Here had we now our Countries Honor, roof'd,

   Lenox. May't please your Highnesse sit

And health on both
Now good digestion waite on Appetite,
  Macb. Sweet Remembrancer:

Enter the Ghost of Banquo, and sits in Macbeths place.
Meeting were bare without it.
From thence, the sawce to meate is Ceremony,
'Tis giuen, with welcome: to feede were best at home:
That is not often vouch'd, while 'tis a making:
You do not giue the Cheere, the Feast is sold
  Lady. My Royall Lord,

Exit Murderer.

Wee'l heare our selues againe.
No teeth for th' present. Get thee gone, to morrow
Hath Nature that in time will Venom breed,
There the growne Serpent lyes, the worme that's fled
   Macb. Thankes for that:

The least a Death to Nature
With twenty trenched gashes on his head;
  Mur. I, my good Lord: safe in a ditch he bides,
To sawcy doubts, and feares. But Banquo's safe?
But now I am cabin'd, crib'd, confin'd, bound in
As broad, and generall, as the casing Ayre:
Whole as the Marble, founded as the Rocke,
I had else beene perfect;
   Macb. Then comes my Fit againe:

Fleans is scap'd
   Mur. Most Royall Sir

If thou did'st it, thou art the Non-pareill
Yet hee's good that did the like for Fleans:
   Mac. Thou art the best o'th' Cut-throats,

  Mur. My Lord his throat is cut, that I did for him
Is he dispatch'd?
   Macb. 'Tis better thee without, then he within.

   Mur. 'Tis Banquo's then

The Table round. There's blood vpon thy face
Be large in mirth, anon wee'l drinke a Measure
Both sides are euen: heere Ile sit i'th' mid'st,
  Macb. See they encounter thee with their harts thanks

Enter first Murtherer.
For my heart speakes, they are welcome.
   La. Pronounce it for me Sir, to all our Friends,

We will require her welcome
Our Hostesse keepes her State, but in best time
And play the humble Host:
   Macb. Our selfe will mingle with Society,

   Lords. Thankes to your Maiesty

At first and last, the hearty welcome
  Macb. You know your owne degrees, sit downe:

Attendants.
Banquet prepar'd. Enter Macbeth, Lady, Rosse, Lenox, Lords, and

Scaena Quarta.


Exeunt.

   1. Well, let's away, and say how much is done.

Best halfe of our Affaire
   2. We haue lost

  3. There's but one downe: the Sonne is fled
  1. Was't not the way?
  3. Who did strike out the Light?
Thou may'st reuenge. O Slaue!
Flye good Fleans, flye, flye, flye,
   Ban. O, Trecherie!

   1. Let it come downe

   Ban. It will be Rayne to Night

   1. Stand too't

   3. 'Tis hee

  2. A Light, a Light

Enter Banquo and Fleans, with a Torch.
Make it their Walke.
So all men doe, from hence toth' Pallace Gate
   3. Almost a mile: but he does vsually,

   1. His Horses goe about

Alreadie are i'th' Court
The rest, that are within the note of expectation,
   2. Then 'tis hee:

   Banquo within. Giue vs a Light there, hoa

   3. Hearke, I heare Horses

The subiect of our Watch
To gayne the timely Inne, and neere approches
Now spurres the lated Traueller apace,
The West yet glimmers with some streakes of Day.
   1. Then stand with vs:

To the direction iust
Our Offices, and what we haue to doe,
   2. He needes not our mistrust, since he deliuers

  3. Macbeth
  1. But who did bid thee ioyne with vs?

Enter three Murtherers.

Scena Tertia.


Exeunt.

So prythee goe with me.
Things bad begun, make strong themselues by ill:
Thou maruell'st at my words: but hold thee still,
Whiles Nights black Agents to their Prey's doe rowse.
Good things of Day begin to droope, and drowse,
And the Crow makes Wing toth' Rookie Wood:
Which keepes me pale. Light thickens,
Cancell and teare to pieces that great Bond,
And with thy bloodie and inuisible Hand
Skarfe vp the tender Eye of pittifull Day,
Till thou applaud the deed: Come, seeling Night,
  Macb. Be innocent of the knowledge, dearest Chuck,
   Lady. What's to be done?

There shall be done a deed of dreadfull note
Hath rung Nights yawning Peale,
The shard-borne Beetle, with his drowsie hums,
His Cloyster'd flight, ere to black Heccats summons
Then be thou iocund: ere the Bat hath flowne
   Macb. There's comfort yet, they are assaileable,

   Lady. But in them, Natures Coppie's not eterne

Thou know'st, that Banquo and his Fleans liues
   Macb. O, full of Scorpions is my Minde, deare Wife:

   Lady. You must leaue this

Disguising what they are
And make our Faces Vizards to our Hearts,
Our Honors in these flattering streames,
Vnsafe the while, that wee must laue
Present him Eminence, both with Eye and Tongue:
Let your remembrance apply to Banquo,
   Macb. So shall I Loue, and so I pray be you:

Be bright and Iouiall among your Guests to Night
Gentle my Lord, sleeke o're your rugged Lookes,
   Lady. Come on:

Can touch him further
Mallice domestique, forraine Leuie, nothing,
Treason ha's done his worst: nor Steele, nor Poyson,
After Lifes fitfull Feuer, he sleepes well,
Duncane is in his Graue:
In restlesse extasie.
Then on the torture of the Minde to lye
Whom we, to gayne our peace, haue sent to peace,
That shake vs Nightly: Better be with the dead,
In the affliction of these terrible Dreames,
Ere we will eate our Meale in feare, and sleepe
Both the Worlds suffer,
But let the frame of things dis-ioynt,
Remaines in danger of her former Tooth.
Shee'le close, and be her selfe, whilest our poore Mallice
   Macb. We haue scorch'd the Snake, not kill'd it:

Should be without regard: what's done, is done
With them they thinke on: things without all remedie
Vsing those Thoughts, which should indeed haue dy'd
Of sorryest Fancies your Companions making,
How now, my Lord, why doe you keepe alone?

Enter Macbeth.
Then by destruction dwell in doubtfull ioy.
'Tis safer, to be that which we destroy,
Where our desire is got without content:
  Lady. Nought's had, all's spent.

Enter.
   Seruant. Madame, I will.

For a few words
   Lady. Say to the King, I would attend his leysure,

  Seruant. I, Madame, but returnes againe to Night
  Lady. Is Banquo gone from Court?

Enter Macbeths Lady, and a Seruant.

Scena Secunda.


Exeunt.

If it finde Heauen, must finde it out to Night.
It is concluded: Banquo, thy Soules flight,
   Macb. Ile call vpon you straight: abide within,

   Murth. We are resolu'd, my Lord

Ile come to you anon
Of that darke houre: resolue your selues apart,
Then is his Fathers, must embrace the fate
Whose absence is no lesse materiall to me,
  Fleans , his Sonne, that keepes him companie,
To leaue no Rubs nor Botches in the Worke:
That I require a clearenesse; and with him,
And something from the Pallace: alwayes thought,
The moment on't, for't must be done to Night,
Acquaint you with the perfect Spy o'th' time,
I will aduise you where to plant your selues,
Within this houre, at most,
  Macb. Your Spirits shine through you.
   1.Murth. Though our Liues-

Performe what you command vs
   2.Murth. We shall, my Lord,

For sundry weightie Reasons
Masking the Businesse from the common Eye,
That I to your assistance doe make loue,
Who I my selfe struck downe: and thence it is,
Whose loues I may not drop, but wayle his fall,
For certaine friends that are both his, and mine,
And bid my will auouch it; yet I must not,
With bare-fac'd power sweepe him from my sight,
Against my neer'st of Life: and though I could
That euery minute of his being, thrusts
   Macb. So is he mine: and in such bloody distance,

   Murth. True, my Lord

   Macb. Both of you know Banquo was your Enemie

To mend it, or be rid on't
That I would set my Life on any Chance,
So wearie with Disasters, tugg'd with Fortune,
   1.Murth. And I another,

To spight the World
Hath so incens'd, that I am recklesse what I doe,
Whom the vile Blowes and Buffets of the World
   2.Murth. I am one, my Liege,

Which in his Death were perfect
Who weare our Health but sickly in his Life,
Grapples you to the heart; and loue of vs,
Whose execution takes your Enemie off,
And I will put that Businesse in your Bosomes,
Not i'th' worst ranke of Manhood, say't,
Now, if you haue a station in the file,
That writes them all alike: and so of men.
Particular addition, from the Bill,
Hath in him clos'd: whereby he does receiue
According to the gift, which bounteous Nature
The House-keeper, the Hunter, euery one
Distinguishes the swift, the slow, the subtle,
All by the Name of Dogges: the valued file
Showghes, Water-Rugs, and Demy-Wolues are clipt
As Hounds, and Greyhounds, Mungrels, Spaniels, Curres,
   Macb. I, in the Catalogue ye goe for men,

  1.Murth. We are men, my Liege
Yours for euer?
Hath bow'd you to the Graue, and begger'd
And for his Issue, whose heauie hand
Are you so Gospell'd, to pray for this good man,
In your nature, that you can let this goe?
Doe you finde your patience so predominant,
Our point of second meeting.
And went further, which is now
   Macb. I did so:

   1.Murth. You made it knowne to vs

Say, Thus did Banquo
To halfe a Soule, and to a Notion craz'd,
And all things else, that might
The Instruments: who wrought with them:
How you were borne in hand, how crost:
Past in probation with you:
This I made good to you, in our last conference,
Which you thought had been our innocent selfe.
Which held you so vnder fortune,
Know, that it was he, in the times past,
Now haue you consider'd of my speeches:
   Macb. Well then,

  Murth. It was, so please your Highnesse
Was it not yesterday we spoke together?

Exit Seruant.

Now goe to the Doore, and stay there till we call.

Enter Seruant, and two Murtherers.
Who's there?
And champion me to th' vtterance.
Rather then so, come Fate into the Lyst,
To make them Kings, the Seedes of Banquo Kings.
Giuen to the common Enemie of Man,
Onely for them, and mine eternall Iewell
Put Rancours in the Vessell of my Peace
For them, the gracious Duncan haue I murther'd,
For Banquo's Issue haue I fil'd my Minde,
No Sonne of mine succeeding: if't be so,
Thence to be wrencht with an vnlineall Hand,
And put a barren Scepter in my Gripe,
Vpon my Head they plac'd a fruitlesse Crowne,
They hayl'd him Father to a Line of Kings.
And bad them speake to him. Then Prophet-like,
When first they put the Name of King vpon me,
Mark Anthonies was by Caesar. He chid the Sisters,
My Genius is rebuk'd, as it is said
Whose being I doe feare: and vnder him,
To act in safetie. There is none but he,
He hath a Wisdome, that doth guide his Valour,
And to that dauntlesse temper of his Minde,
Which would be fear'd. 'Tis much he dares,
And in his Royaltie of Nature reignes that
Our feares in Banquo sticke deepe,
To be thus, is nothing, but to be safely thus

Exit Seruant.

   Macb. Bring them before vs.

Gate
  Seruant. They are, my Lord, without the Pallace
Our pleasure?
Sirrha, a word with you: Attend those men

Exeunt. Lords.

While then, God be with you.
We will keepe our selfe till Supper time alone:
The sweeter welcome:
Till seuen at Night, to make societie
Let euery man be master of his time,

Exit Banquo.

Farwell.
And so I doe commend you to their backs.
   Macb. I wish your Horses swift, and sure of foot:

  Ban. I, my good Lord: our time does call vpon's
Goes Fleance with you?
Adieu, till you returne at Night.
Crauing vs ioyntly. Hye you to Horse:
When therewithall, we shall haue cause of State,
With strange inuention. But of that to morrow,
Their cruell Parricide, filling their hearers
In England, and in Ireland, not confessing
   Macb. We heare our bloody Cozens are bestow'd

   Ban. My Lord, I will not

   Macb. Faile not our Feast

For a darke houre, or twaine
I must become a borrower of the Night,
'Twixt this, and Supper. Goe not my Horse the better,
  Ban. As farre, my Lord, as will fill vp the time
Is't farre you ride?
In this dayes Councell: but wee'le take to morrow.
(Which still hath been both graue, and prosperous)
   Macb. We should haue else desir'd your good aduice

  Ban. I, my good Lord
   Macb. Ride you this afternoone?

For euer knit
Are with a most indissoluble tye
Command vpon me, to the which my duties
   Banq. Let your Highnesse

And Ile request your presence
   Macb. To night we hold a solemne Supper sir,

And all-thing vnbecomming
It had bene as a gap in our great Feast,
   La. If he had beene forgotten,

  Macb. Heere's our chiefe Guest

Attendants.
and
Senit sounded. Enter Macbeth as King, Lady Lenox, Rosse, Lords,

And set me vp in hope. But hush, no more.
May they not be my Oracles as well,
Why by the verities on thee made good,
As vpon thee Macbeth, their Speeches shine,
Of many Kings. If there come truth from them,
But that my selfe should be the Roote, and Father
It should not stand in thy Posterity,
Thou playd'st most fowly for't: yet it was saide
As the weyard Women promis'd, and I feare
  Banq. Thou hast it now, King, Cawdor, Glamis, all,

Enter Banquo.

Actus Tertius. Scena Prima.

Exeunt. omnes

That would make good of bad, and Friends of Foes.
   Old M. Gods benyson go with you, and with those

   Rosse. Farewell, Father

Least our old Robes sit easier then our new
   Macd. Well may you see things wel done there: Adieu

   Rosse. Well, I will thither

  Macd. No Cosin, Ile to Fife
   Rosse. Will you to Scone?

And Guardian of their Bones
The Sacred Store-house of his Predecessors,
  Macd. Carried to Colmekill,
   Rosse. Where is Duncans body?

To be inuested
   Macd. He is already nam'd, and gone to Scone

The Soueraignty will fall vpon Macbeth
Thine owne liues meanes: Then 'tis most like,
Thriftlesse Ambition, that will rauen vp
   Rosse. 'Gainst Nature still,

Suspition of the deed
Are stolne away and fled, which puts vpon them
Malcolme, and Donalbaine the Kings two Sonnes
  Macd. They were subborned,
What good could they pretend?
   Ross. Alas the day,

  Macd. Those that Macbeth hath slaine
  Ross. Is't known who did this more then bloody deed?
  Macd. Why see you not?
How goes the world Sir, now?
Heere comes the good Macduffe.

Enter Macduffe.
To th' amazement of mine eyes that look'd vpon't.
   Rosse. They did so:

   Old man. 'Tis said, they eate each other

Make Warre with Mankinde
Contending 'gainst Obedience, as they would
Turn'd wilde in nature, broke their stalls, flong out,
Beauteous, and swift, the Minions of their Race,
(A thing most strange, and certaine)
   Rosse. And Duncans Horses,

Was by a Mowsing Owle hawkt at, and kill'd
A Faulcon towring in her pride of place,
Euen like the deed that's done: On Tuesday last,
  Old man. 'Tis vnnaturall,
When liuing Light should kisse it?
That Darknesse does the face of Earth intombe,
Is't Nights predominance, or the Dayes shame,
And yet darke Night strangles the trauailing Lampe:
Threatens his bloody Stage: byth' Clock 'tis Day,
Thou seest the Heauens, as troubled with mans Act,
   Rosse. Ha, good Father,

Hath trifled former knowings
Houres dreadfull, and things strange: but this sore Night
Within the Volume of which Time, I haue seene
  Old man. Threescore and ten I can remember well,

Enter Rosse, with an Old man.

Scena Quarta.



Exeunt.

Which steales it selfe, when there's no mercie left.
But shift away: there's warrant in that Theft,
And let vs not be daintie of leaue-taking,
Is to auoid the ayme. Therefore to Horse,
Hath not yet lighted: and our safest way,
   Malc. This murtherous Shaft that's shot,

The neere in blood, the neerer bloody
Where we are, there's Daggers in mens smiles;
Our seperated fortune shall keepe vs both the safer:
   Don. To Ireland, I:

Ile to England
Which the false man do's easie.
To shew an vnfelt Sorrow, is an Office
Let's not consort with them:
  Malc. What will you doe?

Exeunt.

   All. Well contented.

And meet i'th' Hall together
   Macb. Let's briefely put on manly readinesse,

   All. So all

   Macd. And so doe I

Of Treasonous Mallice
Against the vndivulg'd pretence, I fight
In the great Hand of God I stand, and thence,
To know it further. Feares and scruples shake vs:
And question this most bloody piece of worke,
That suffer in exposure; let vs meet,
And when we haue our naked Frailties hid,
   Banq. Looke to the Lady:

Vpon the foot of Motion
   Mal. Nor our strong Sorrow

Our Teares are not yet brew'd
May rush, and seize vs? Let's away,
Where our Fate hid in an augure hole,
  Donal. What should be spoken here,
That most may clayme this argument for ours?
   Mal. Why doe we hold our tongues,

   Macd. Looke to the Lady

  Lady. Helpe me hence, hoa
Courage, to make's loue knowne?
That had a heart to loue; and in that heart,
Vnmannerly breech'd with gore: who could refraine,
Steep'd in the Colours of their Trade; their Daggers
For Ruines wastfull entrance: there the Murtherers,
And his gash'd Stabs, look'd like a Breach in Nature,
His Siluer skinne, lac'd with His Golden Blood,
Out-run the pawser, Reason. Here lay Duncan,
Th' expedition of my violent Loue
Loyall, and Neutrall, in a moment? No man:
  Macb. Who can be wise, amaz'd, temp'rate, & furious,
   Macd. Wherefore did you so?

That I did kill them
   Macb. O, yet I doe repent me of my furie,

No mans Life was to be trusted with them
Vpon their Pillowes: they star'd, and were distracted,
So were their Daggers, which vnwip'd, we found
Their Hands and Faces were all badg'd with blood,
  Lenox. Those of his Chamber, as it seem'd, had don't:
   Mal. Oh, by whom?

   Macd. Your Royall Father's murther'd

Is stopt, the very Source of it is stopt
The Spring, the Head, the Fountaine of your Blood
  Macb. You are, and doe not know't:
  Donal. What is amisse?

Enter Malcolme and Donalbaine.
Is left this Vault, to brag of.
The Wine of Life is drawne, and the meere Lees
All is but Toyes: Renowne and Grace is dead,
There's nothing serious in Mortalitie:
I had liu'd a blessed time: for from this instant,
  Macb. Had I but dy'd an houre before this chance,

Enter Macbeth, Lenox, and Rosse.
And say, it is not so.
Deare Duff, I prythee contradict thy selfe,
  Ban. Too cruell, any where.
What, in our House?
   Lady. Woe, alas:

O Banquo, Banquo, Our Royall Master's murther'd

Enter Banquo.
Would murther as it fell.
The repetition in a Womans eare,
'Tis not for you to heare what I can speake:
   Macd. O gentle Lady,

The sleepers of the House? speake, speake
That such a hideous Trumpet calls to parley
  Lady. What's the Businesse?

Bell rings. Enter Lady.

To countenance this horror. Ring the Bell.
As from your Graues rise vp, and walke like Sprights,
The great Doomes Image: Malcolme, Banquo,
And looke on Death it selfe: vp, vp, and see
Shake off this Downey sleepe, Deaths counterfeit,
Banquo, and Donalbaine: Malcolme awake,
Ring the Alarum Bell: Murther, and Treason,

Exeunt. Macbeth and Lenox.

See, and then speake your selues: awake, awake,
With a new Gorgon. Doe not bid me speake:
  Macd. Approch the Chamber, and destroy your sight
  Lenox. Meane you his Maiestie?
   Macb. What is't you say, the Life?

The Life o'th' Building
The Lords anoynted Temple, and stole thence
Most sacrilegious Murther hath broke ope
  Macd. Confusion now hath made his Master-peece:
   Macb. and Lenox. What's the matter?

Tongue nor Heart cannot conceiue, nor name thee
  Macd. O horror, horror, horror,

Enter Macduff.
A fellow to it.
   Lenox. My young remembrance cannot paralell

   Macb. 'Twas a rough Night

And did shake
Some say, the Earth was Feuorous,
The obscure Bird clamor'd the liue-long Night.
New hatch'd toth' wofull time.
Of dyre Combustion, and confus'd Euents,
And Prophecying, with Accents terrible,
Strange Schreemes of Death,
And (as they say) lamentings heard i'th' Ayre;
Where we lay, our Chimneys were blowne downe,
   Lenox. The Night ha's been vnruly:

  Macb. He does: he did appoint so
  Lenox. Goes the King hence to day?

Exit Macduffe.

seruice.
   Macd. Ile make so bold to call, for 'tis my limitted

This is the Doore
   Macb. The labour we delight in, Physicks paine:

But yet 'tis one
   Macd. I know this is a ioyfull trouble to you:

   Macb. Ile bring you to him

I haue almost slipt the houre
   Macd. He did command me to call timely on him,

  Macb. Not yet
   Macd. Is the King stirring, worthy Thane?

   Macb. Good morrow both

   Lenox. Good morrow, Noble Sir

Our knocking ha's awak'd him: here he comes
  Macd. Is thy Master stirring?

Enter Macbeth.
made a Shift to cast him.
for him, though he tooke vp my Legges sometime, yet I
requited him for his Lye, and (I thinke) being too strong
   Port. That it did, Sir, i'the very Throat on me: but I

   Macd. I beleeue, Drinke gaue thee the Lye last Night

leaues him
equiuocates him in a sleepe, and giuing him the Lye,
him; makes him stand too, and not stand too: in conclusion,
and it takes him off; it perswades him, and dis-heartens
it makes him, and it marres him; it sets him on,
much Drinke may be said to be an Equiuocator with Lecherie:
the desire, but it takes away the performance. Therefore
Lecherie, Sir, it prouokes, and vnprouokes: it prouokes
  Port. Marry, Sir, Nose-painting, Sleepe, and Vrine.
prouoke?
   Macd. What three things does Drinke especially

And Drinke, Sir, is a great prouoker of three things
  Port. Faith Sir, we were carowsing till the second Cock:
That you doe lye so late?
  Macd. Was it so late, friend, ere you went to Bed,

Enter Macduff, and Lenox.
Anon, anon, I pray you remember the Porter.

Knock.

goe the Primrose way to th' euerlasting Bonfire.
I had thought to haue let in some of all Professions, that
place is too cold for Hell. Ile Deuill-Porter it no further:
Knock, Knock. Neuer at quiet: What are you? but this

Knock.
Come in Taylor, here you may rost your Goose.
Taylor come hither, for stealing out of a French Hose:
Knock, Knock, Knock. Who's there? 'Faith here's an English

Knock.

oh come in, Equiuocator.
enough for Gods sake, yet could not equiuocate to Heauen:
the Scales against eyther Scale, who committed Treason
Faith here's an Equiuocator, that could sweare in both
Knock, knock. Who's there in th' other Deuils Name?

Knock.

Napkins enow about you, here you'le sweat for't.
himselfe on th' expectation of Plentie: Come in time, haue
i'th' name of Belzebub? Here's a Farmer, that hang'd
Knock, Knock, Knock. Who's there

Knock.

Key.
Porter of Hell Gate, hee should haue old turning the
  Porter. Here's a knocking indeede: if a man were

Enter a Porter. Knocking within.

Scena Tertia.


Exeunt.

I would thou could'st.
Wake Duncan with thy knocking:
'Twere best not know my selfe.

Knocke.

   Macb. To know my deed,

So poorely in your thoughts
And shew vs to be Watchers: be not lost
Get on your Night-Gowne, least occasion call vs,
Hearke, more knocking.

Knocke.

Hath left you vnattended.
How easie is it then? your Constancie
A little Water cleares vs of this deed.
Retyre we to our Chamber:
I heare a knocking at the South entry:

Knocke.

To weare a Heart so white.
  Lady. My Hands are of your colour: but I shame

Enter Lady.
Making the Greene one, Red.
The multitudinous Seas incarnardine,
Cleane from my Hand? no: this my Hand will rather
Will all great Neptunes Ocean wash this blood
What Hands are here? hah: they pluck out mine Eyes.
How is't with me, when euery noyse appalls me?
  Macb. Whence is that knocking?

Knocke within.

Enter.
For it must seeme their Guilt.
Ile guild the Faces of the Groomes withall,
That feares a painted Deuill. If he doe bleed,
Are but as Pictures: 'tis the Eye of Childhood,
Giue me the Daggers: the sleeping, and the dead,
   Lady. Infirme of purpose:

Looke on't againe, I dare not
I am afraid, to thinke what I haue done:
   Macb. Ile goe no more:

The sleepie Groomes with blood
They must lye there: goe carry them, and smeare
Why did you bring these Daggers from the place?
And wash this filthie Witnesse from your Hand.
So braine-sickly of things: Goe get some Water,
You doe vnbend your Noble strength, to thinke
   Lady. Who was it, that thus cry'd? why worthy Thane,

Shall sleepe no more: Macbeth shall sleepe no more
Glamis hath murther'd Sleepe, and therefore Cawdor
  Macb. Still it cry'd, Sleepe no more to all the House:
   Lady. What doe you meane?

Chiefe nourisher in Life's Feast
Balme of hurt Mindes, great Natures second Course,
The death of each dayes Life, sore Labors Bath,
Sleepe that knits vp the rauel'd Sleeue of Care,
Macbeth does murther Sleepe, the innocent Sleepe,
   Macb. Me thought I heard a voyce cry, Sleep no more:

After these wayes: so, it will make vs mad
   Lady. These deeds must not be thought

I had most need of Blessing, and Amen stuck in my throat
   Mac. But wherefore could not I pronounce Amen?

   Lady. Consider it not so deepely

When they did say God blesse vs
Listning their feare, I could not say Amen,
As they had seene me with these Hangmans hands:
   Macb. One cry'd God blesse vs, and Amen the other,

   Lady. There are two lodg'd together

And addrest them againe to sleepe
I stood, and heard them: But they did say their Prayers,
And one cry'd Murther, that they did wake each other:
   Macb. There's one did laugh in's sleepe,

   Lady. A foolish thought, to say a sorry sight

   Mac. This is a sorry sight

  Lady. Donalbaine
   Macb. Hearke, who lyes i'th' second Chamber?

  Lady. I
   Macb. As I descended?

  Lady. Now
  Macb. When?
Did not you speake?
  Lady. I heard the Owle schreame, and the Crickets cry.
Didst thou not heare a noyse?
  Macb. I haue done the deed:
My Husband?
My Father as he slept, I had don't.
He could not misse 'em. Had he not resembled
Confounds vs: hearke: I lay'd their Daggers ready,
And 'tis not done: th' attempt, and not the deed,
  Lady. Alack, I am afraid they haue awak'd,
  Macb. Who's there? what hoa?

Enter Macbeth.
Whether they liue, or dye.
That Death and Nature doe contend about them,
With Snores. I haue drugg'd their Possets,
And the surfeted Groomes doe mock their charge
He is about it, the Doores are open:
The fatall Bell-man, which giues the stern'st good-night.
Hearke, peace: it was the Owle that shriek'd,
What hath quench'd them, hath giuen me fire.
  La. That which hath made the[m] drunk, hath made me bold:

Enter Lady.

Scena Secunda.


Enter.
That summons thee to Heauen, or to Hell.
Heare it not, Duncan, for it is a Knell,
I goe, and it is done: the Bell inuites me.

A Bell rings.

Words to the heat of deedes too cold breath giues.
Which now sutes with it. Whiles I threat, he liues:
And take the present horror from the time,
Thy very stones prate of my where-about,
Heare not my steps, which they may walke, for feare
Moues like a Ghost. Thou sowre and firme-set Earth
With Tarquins rauishing sides, towards his designe
Whose howle's his Watch, thus with his stealthy pace,
Alarum'd by his Centinell, the Wolfe,
Pale Heccats Offrings: and wither'd Murther,
The Curtain'd sleepe: Witchcraft celebrates
Nature seemes dead, and wicked Dreames abuse
Thus to mine Eyes. Now o're the one halfe World
It is the bloody Businesse, which informes
Which was not so before. There's no such thing:
And on thy Blade, and Dudgeon, Gouts of Blood,
Or else worth all the rest: I see thee still;
Mine Eyes are made the fooles o'th' other Sences,
And such an Instrument I was to vse.
Thou marshall'st me the way that I was going,
As this which now I draw.
I see thee yet, in forme as palpable,
Proceeding from the heat-oppressed Braine?
A Dagger of the Minde, a false Creation,
To feeling, as to sight? or art thou but
Art thou not fatall Vision, sensible
I haue thee not, and yet I see thee still.
The Handle toward my Hand? Come, let me clutch thee:
Is this a Dagger, which I see before me,

Enter.
She strike vpon the Bell. Get thee to bed.
  Macb. Goe bid thy Mistresse, when my drinke is ready,

Exit Banquo.

   Banq. Thankes Sir: the like to you.

   Macb. Good repose the while

I shall be counsail'd
My Bosome franchis'd, and Allegeance cleare,
In seeking to augment it, but still keepe
   Banq. So I lose none,

When 'tis, it shall make Honor for you
   Macb. If you shall cleaue to my consent,

   Banq. At your kind'st leysure

If you would graunt the time
We would spend it in some words vpon that Businesse,
Yet when we can entreat an houre to serue,
   Macb. I thinke not of them:

To you they haue shew'd some truth
I dreamt last Night of the three weyward Sisters:
   Banq. All's well.

Which else should free haue wrought
Our will became the seruant to defect,
   Mac. Being vnprepar'd,

And shut vp in measurelesse content
By the name of most kind Hostesse,
This Diamond he greetes your Wife withall,
And sent forth great Largesse to your Offices.
He hath beene in vnusuall Pleasure,
   Banq. What Sir, not yet at rest? the King's a bed.

  Macb. A Friend
Giue me my Sword: who's there?

Enter Macbeth, and a Seruant with a Torch.
That Nature giues way to in repose.
Mercifull Powers, restraine in me the cursed thoughts
And yet I would not sleepe:
A heauie Summons lyes like Lead vpon me,
Their Candles are all out: take thee that too.
There's Husbandry in Heauen,
   Banq. Hold, take my Sword:

   Fleance. I take't, 'tis later, Sir

   Banq. And she goes downe at Twelue

Clock
  Fleance. The Moone is downe: I haue not heard the
  Banq. How goes the Night, Boy?

Enter Banquo, and Fleance, with a Torch before him.

Actus Secundus. Scena Prima.


Exeunt.

False Face must hide what the false Heart doth know.
Away, and mock the time with fairest show,
Each corporall Agent to this terrible Feat.
  Macb. I am settled, and bend vp
Vpon his Death?
As we shall make our Griefes and Clamor rore,
  Lady. Who dares receiue it other,
That they haue don't?
Of his owne Chamber, and vs'd their very Daggers,
When we haue mark'd with blood those sleepie two
Nothing but Males. Will it not be receiu'd,
For thy vndaunted Mettle should compose
   Macb. Bring forth Men-Children onely:

Of our great quell
His spungie Officers? who shall beare the guilt
Th' vnguarded Duncan? What not put vpon
What cannot you and I performe vpon
Their drenched Natures lyes as in a Death,
A Lymbeck onely: when in Swinish sleepe,
Shall be a Fume, and the Receit of Reason
That Memorie, the Warder of the Braine,
Will I with Wine, and Wassell, so conuince,
Soundly inuite him) his two Chamberlaines
(Whereto the rather shall his dayes hard Iourney
And wee'le not fayle: when Duncan is asleepe,
But screw your courage to the sticking place,
  Lady. We faile?
   Macb. If we should faile?

As you haue done to this
And dasht the Braines out, had I so sworne
Haue pluckt my Nipple from his Bonelesse Gummes,
I would, while it was smyling in my Face,
How tender 'tis to loue the Babe that milkes me,
Do's vnmake you. I haue giuen Sucke, and know
They haue made themselues, and that their fitnesse now
Did then adhere, and yet you would make both:
Be so much more the man. Nor time, nor place
And to be more then what you were, you would
When you durst do it, then you were a man:
That made you breake this enterprize to me?
   La. What Beast was't then

Who dares do more, is none
I dare do all that may become a man,
   Macb. Prythee peace:

Like the poore Cat i'th' Addage
Letting I dare not, wait vpon I would,
And liue a Coward in thine owne Esteeme?
Which thou esteem'st the Ornament of Life,
As thou art in desire? Would'st thou haue that
To be the same in thine owne Act, and Valour,
Such I account thy loue. Art thou affear'd
At what it did so freely? From this time,
And wakes it now to looke so greene, and pale,
Wherein you drest your selfe? Hath it slept since?
   La. Was the hope drunke,

Not cast aside so soone
Which would be worne now in their newest glosse,
Golden Opinions from all sorts of people,
He hath Honour'd me of late, and I haue bought
  Mac. We will proceed no further in this Businesse:
  La. Know you not, he ha's?
  Mac. Hath he ask'd for me?
  La. He has almost supt: why haue you left the chamber?
How now? What Newes?

Enter Lady.
And falles on th' other.
Vaulting Ambition, which ore-leapes it selfe,
To pricke the sides of my intent, but onely
That teares shall drowne the winde. I haue no Spurre
Shall blow the horrid deed in euery eye,
Vpon the sightlesse Curriors of the Ayre,
Striding the blast, or Heauens Cherubin, hors'd
And Pitty, like a naked New-borne-Babe,
The deepe damnation of his taking off:
Will pleade like Angels, Trumpet-tongu'd against
So cleere in his great Office, that his Vertues
Hath borne his Faculties so meeke; hath bin
Not beare the knife my selfe. Besides, this Duncane
Who should against his Murtherer shut the doore,
Strong both against the Deed: Then, as his Host,
First, as I am his Kinsman, and his Subiect,
To our owne lips. Hee's heere in double trust;
Commends th' Ingredience of our poyson'd Challice
To plague th' Inuenter, this euen-handed Iustice
Bloody Instructions, which being taught, returne
We still haue iudgement heere, that we but teach
Wee'ld iumpe the life to come. But in these Cases,
But heere, vpon this Banke and Schoole of time,
Might be the be all, and the end all. Heere,
With his surcease, Successe: that but this blow
Could trammell vp the Consequence, and catch
It were done quickly: If th' Assassination
   Macb. If it were done, when 'tis done, then 'twer well,

Seruice ouer the Stage. Then enter Macbeth
and
Hoboyes. Torches. Enter a Sewer, and diuers Seruants with Dishes

Scena Septima.

Exeunt.

By your leaue Hostesse.
And shall continue, our Graces towards him.
Conduct me to mine Host we loue him highly,
   King. Giue me your hand:

Still to returne your owne
To make their Audit at your Highnesse pleasure,
Haue theirs, themselues, and what is theirs in compt,
   La. Your Seruants euer,

We are your guest to night
To his home before vs: Faire and Noble Hostesse
And his great Loue (sharpe as his Spurre) hath holp him
To be his Purueyor: But he rides well,
We courst him at the heeles, and had a purpose
   King. Where's the Thane of Cawdor?

Heap'd vp to them, we rest your Ermites
For those of old, and the late Dignities,
Wherewith your Maiestie loades our House:
Against those Honors deepe, and broad,
Were poore, and single Businesse, to contend
In euery point twice done, and then done double,
   Lady. All our seruice,

And thanke vs for your trouble
How you shall bid God-eyld vs for your paines,
Which still we thanke as Loue. Herein I teach you,
The Loue that followes vs, sometime is our trouble,
  King. See, see our honor'd Hostesse:

Enter Lady.
The ayre is delicate.
Where they must breed, and haunt: I haue obseru'd
Hath made his pendant Bed, and procreant Cradle,
Buttrice, nor Coigne of Vantage, but this Bird
Smells wooingly here: no Iutty frieze,
By his loued Mansonry, that the Heauens breath
The Temple-haunting Barlet does approue,
   Banq. This Guest of Summer,

Vnto our gentle sences
The ayre nimbly and sweetly recommends it selfe
  King. This Castle hath a pleasant seat,

Macduff, Rosse, Angus, and Attendants.
Banquo, Lenox,
Hoboyes, and Torches. Enter King, Malcolme, Donalbaine,

Scena Sexta.


Exeunt.

Leaue all the rest to me.
To alter fauor, euer is to feare:
  Lady. Onely looke vp cleare:
   Macb. We will speake further,

Giue solely soueraigne sway, and Masterdome
Which shall to all our Nights, and Dayes to come,
This Nights great Businesse into my dispatch,
Must be prouided for: and you shall put
But be the Serpent vnder't. He that's comming,
Your Hand, your Tongue: looke like th' innocent flower,
Looke like the time, beare welcome in your Eye,
May reade strange matters, to beguile the time.
Your Face, my Thane, is as a Booke, where men
Shall Sunne that Morrow see.
   Lady. O neuer,

  Macb. To morrow, as he purposes
   Lady. And when goes hence?

Duncan comes here to Night
   Macb. My dearest Loue,

The future in the instant
This ignorant present, and I feele now
Thy Letters haue transported me beyond
Greater then both, by the all-haile hereafter,
Great Glamys, worthy Cawdor,

Enter Macbeth.
To cry, hold, hold.
Nor Heauen peepe through the Blanket of the darke,
That my keene Knife see not the Wound it makes,

And pall thee in the dunnest smoake of Hell,
You wait on Natures Mischiefe. Come thick Night,
Where-euer, in your sightlesse substances,
And take my Milke for Gall, you murth'ring Ministers,
Th' effect, and hit. Come to my Womans Brests,
Shake my fell purpose, nor keepe peace betweene
That no compunctious visitings of Nature
Stop vp th' accesse, and passage to Remorse,
Of direst Crueltie: make thick my blood,
And fill me from the Crowne to the Toe, top-full
That tend on mortall thoughts, vnsex me here,
Vnder my Battlements. Come you Spirits,
That croakes the fatall entrance of Duncan
The Rauen himselfe is hoarse,

Exit Messenger.

He brings great newes,
   Lady. Giue him tending,

Then would make vp his Message
Who almost dead for breath, had scarcely more
One of my fellowes had the speed of him;
   Mess. So please you, it is true: our Thane is comming:

Would haue inform'd for preparation
Is not thy Master with him? who, wer't so,
   Lady. Thou'rt mad to say it.

  Mess. The King comes here to Night
What is your tidings?

Enter Messenger.
To haue thee crown'd withall.
Which Fate and Metaphysicall ayde doth seeme
All that impeides thee from the Golden Round,
And chastise with the valour of my Tongue
That I may powre my Spirits in thine Eare,
Then wishest should be vndone. High thee hither,
And that which rather thou do'st feare to doe,
Thus thou must doe, if thou haue it;
Thould'st haue, great Glamys, that which cryes,
And yet would'st wrongly winne.
That would'st thou holily: would'st not play false,
The illnesse should attend it. What thou would'st highly,
Art not without Ambition, but without
To catch the neerest way. Thou would'st be great,
It is too full o'th' Milke of humane kindnesse,
What thou art promis'd: yet doe I feare thy Nature,
Glamys thou art, and Cawdor, and shalt be
it to thy heart and farewell.
by being ignorant of what Greatnesse is promis'd thee. Lay
Greatnesse) that thou might'st not loose the dues of reioycing
haue I thought good to deliuer thee (my dearest Partner of
the comming on of time, with haile King that shalt be. This
before, these weyward Sisters saluted me, and referr'd me to
the King, who all-hail'd me Thane of Cawdor, by which Title
Whiles I stood rapt in the wonder of it, came Missiues from
further, they made themselues Ayre, into which they vanish'd.
mortall knowledge. When I burnt in desire to question them
learn'd by the perfect'st report, they haue more in them, then
  Lady. They met me in the day of successe: and I haue

Enter Macbeths Wife alone with a Letter.

Scena Quinta.


Flourish. Exeunt.

It is a peerelesse Kinsman.
Whose care is gone before, to bid vs welcome:
It is a Banquet to me. Let's after him,
And in his commendations, I am fed:
  King. True worthy Banquo: he is full so valiant,

Enter.
Which the Eye feares, when it is done to see.
The Eye winke at the Hand: yet let that bee,
Let not Light see my black and deepe desires:
For in my way it lyes. Starres hide your fires,
On which I must fall downe, or else o're-leape,
   Macb. The Prince of Cumberland: that is a step,

   King. My worthy Cawdor

So humbly take my leaue
The hearing of my Wife, with your approach:
Ile be my selfe the Herbenger, and make ioyfull
   Macb. The Rest is Labor, which is not vs'd for you:

And binde vs further to you
On all deseruers. From hence to Envernes,
But signes of Noblenesse, like Starres, shall shine
Not vnaccompanied, inuest him onely,
The Prince of Cumberland: which Honor must
Our eldest, Malcolme, whom we name hereafter,
We will establish our Estate vpon
And you whose places are the nearest, know,
In drops of sorrow. Sonnes, Kinsmen, Thanes,
Wanton in fulnesse, seeke to hide themselues
   King. My plenteous Ioyes,

The Haruest is your owne
   Banq. There if I grow,

And hold thee to my Heart
No lesse to haue done so: Let me enfold thee,
That hast no lesse deseru'd, nor must be knowne
To make thee full of growing. Noble Banquo,
I haue begun to plant thee, and will labour
   King. Welcome hither:

And Honor
By doing euery thing safe toward your Loue
Children, and Seruants; which doe but what they should,
And our Duties are to your Throne, and State,
Your Highnesse part, is to receiue our Duties:
In doing it, payes it selfe.
   Macb. The seruice, and the loyaltie I owe,

More is thy due, then more then all can pay
Might haue beene mine: onely I haue left to say,
That the proportion both of thanks, and payment,
To ouertake thee. Would thou hadst lesse deseru'd,
That swiftest Wing of Recompence is slow,
Was heauie on me. Thou art so farre before,
The sinne of my Ingratitude euen now
O worthyest Cousin,

Enter Macbeth, Banquo, Rosse, and Angus.
An absolute Trust.
He was a Gentleman, on whom I built
To finde the Mindes construction in the Face.
   King. There's no Art,

As 'twere a carelesse Trifle
To throw away the dearest thing he ow'd,
As one that had beene studied in his death,
Like the leauing it. Hee dy'de,
Nothing in his Life became him,
And set forth a deepe Repentance:
Confess'd his Treasons, implor'd your Highnesse Pardon,
Who did report, that very frankly hee
But I haue spoke with one that saw him die:
  Mal. My Liege, they are not yet come back.
Or not those in Commission yet return'd?
  King. Is execution done on Cawdor?

Attendants.
Flourish. Enter King, Lenox, Malcolme, Donalbaine, and

Scena Quarta.


Exeunt.

Come friends.
   Macb. Till then enough:

   Banq. Very gladly

Our free Hearts each to other
The Interim hauing weigh'd it, let vs speake
What hath chanc'd: and at more time,
Let vs toward the King: thinke vpon
To reade them.
Where euery day I turne the Leafe,
Kinde Gentlemen, your paines are registred,
My dull Braine was wrought with things forgotten.
   Macb. Giue me your fauour:

   Banq. Worthy Macbeth, wee stay vpon your leysure

Time, and the Houre, runs through the roughest Day
   Macb. Come what come may,

But with the aid of vse
Like our strange Garments, cleaue not to their mould,
   Banq. New Honors come vpon him

Without my stirre
Why Chance may Crowne me,
   Macb. If Chance will haue me King,

   Banq. Looke how our Partner's rapt

And nothing is, but what is not
That Function is smother'd in surmise,
Shakes so my single state of Man,
My Thought, whose Murther yet is but fantasticall,
Are lesse then horrible Imaginings:
Against the vse of Nature? Present Feares
And make my seated Heart knock at my Ribbes,
Whose horrid Image doth vnfixe my Heire,
If good? why doe I yeeld to that suggestion,
Commencing in a Truth? I am Thane of Cawdor.
If ill? why hath it giuen me earnest of successe,
Cannot be ill; cannot be good.
This supernaturall solliciting
Of the Imperiall Theame. I thanke you Gentlemen:
As happy Prologues to the swelling Act
   Macb. Two Truths are told,

Cousins, a word, I pray you
In deepest consequence.
Winne vs with honest Trifles, to betray's
The Instruments of Darknesse tell vs Truths,
And oftentimes, to winne vs to our harme,
Besides the Thane of Cawdor. But 'tis strange:
Might yet enkindle you vnto the Crowne,
   Banq. That trusted home,

Promis'd no lesse to them
When those that gaue the Thane of Cawdor to me,
Doe you not hope your Children shall be Kings,
The greatest is behinde. Thankes for your paines.
   Macb. Glamys, and Thane of Cawdor:

Haue ouerthrowne him
But Treasons Capitall, confess'd, and prou'd,
In his Countreyes wracke, I know not:
And vantage; or that with both he labour'd
Or did lyne the Rebell with hidden helpe,
Whether he was combin'd with those of Norway,
Which he deserues to loose.
But vnder heauie Iudgement beares that Life,
  Ang. Who was the Thane, liues yet,
Why doe you dresse me in borrowed Robes?
  Macb. The Thane of Cawdor liues:
   Banq. What, can the Deuill speake true?

For it is thine
In which addition, haile most worthy Thane,
He bad me, from him, call thee Thane of Cawdor:
   Rosse. And for an earnest of a greater Honor,

Not pay thee
Onely to harrold thee into his sight,
To giue thee from our Royall Master thanks,
   Ang. Wee are sent,

And powr'd them downe before him
Thy prayses in his Kingdomes great defence,
Can post with post, and euery one did beare
Strange Images of death, as thick as Tale
Nothing afeard of what thy selfe didst make
He findes thee in the stout Norweyan Rankes,
In viewing o're the rest o'th' selfe-same day,
Which should be thine, or his: silenc'd with that,
His Wonders and his Prayses doe contend,
Thy personall Venture in the Rebels sight,
The newes of thy successe: and when he reades
  Rosse. The King hath happily receiu'd, Macbeth,

Enter Rosse and Angus.
  Banq. Toth' selfe-same tune and words: who's here?
   Macb. And Thane of Cawdor too: went it not so?

   Banq. You shall be King

  Macb. Your Children shall be Kings
That takes the Reason Prisoner?
Or haue we eaten on the insane Root,
   Banq. Were such things here, as we doe speake about?

Would they had stay'd
Melted, as breath into the Winde.
  Macb. Into the Ayre: and what seem'd corporall,
And these are of them: whither are they vanish'd?
  Banq. The Earth hath bubbles, as the Water ha's,

Witches vanish.

Speake, I charge you.
With such Prophetique greeting?
Vpon this blasted Heath you stop our way
You owe this strange Intelligence, or why
No more then to be Cawdor. Say from whence
Stands not within the prospect of beleefe,
A prosperous Gentleman: And to be King,
But how, of Cawdor? the Thane of Cawdor liues
By Sinells death, I know I am Thane of Glamis,
   Macb. Stay you imperfect Speakers, tell me more:

   1. Banquo, and Macbeth, all haile

So all haile Macbeth, and Banquo
   3. Thou shalt get Kings, though thou be none:

   2. Not so happy, yet much happyer

   1. Lesser than Macbeth, and greater

   3. Hayle

   2. Hayle

   1. Hayle

Your fauors, nor your hate
Speake then to me, who neyther begge, nor feare
And say, which Graine will grow, and which will not,
If you can looke into the Seedes of Time,
That he seemes wrapt withall: to me you speake not.
Of Noble hauing, and of Royall hope,
You greet with present Grace, and great prediction
Which outwardly ye shew? My Noble Partner
Are ye fantasticall, or that indeed
Things that doe sound so faire? i'th' name of truth
   Banq. Good Sir, why doe you start, and seeme to feare

   3. All haile Macbeth, that shalt be King hereafter

   2. All haile Macbeth, haile to thee Thane of Cawdor

  1. All haile Macbeth, haile to thee Thane of Glamis
   Mac. Speake if you can: what are you?

That you are so
And yet your Beards forbid me to interprete
Vpon her skinnie Lips: you should be Women,
By each at once her choppie finger laying
That man may question? you seeme to vnderstand me,
And yet are on't? Liue you, or are you aught
That looke not like th' Inhabitants o'th' Earth,
So wither'd, and so wilde in their attyre,
   Banquo. How farre is't call'd to Soris? What are these,

  Macb. So foule and faire a day I haue not seene

Enter Macbeth and Banquo.
Peace, the Charme's wound vp.
And thrice againe, to make vp nine.
Thrice to thine, and thrice to mine,
Thus doe goe, about, about,
Posters of the Sea and Land,
   All. The weyward Sisters, hand in hand,

Macbeth doth come
  3. A Drumme, a Drumme:

Drum within.

Wrackt, as homeward he did come.
   1. Here I haue a Pilots Thumbe,

   2. Shew me, shew me

Looke what I haue
Yet it shall be Tempest-tost.
Though his Barke cannot be lost,
Shall he dwindle, peake, and pine:
Wearie Seu'nights, nine times nine,
He shall liue a man forbid:
Hang vpon his Pent-house Lid:
Sleepe shall neyther Night nor Day
Ile dreyne him drie as Hay:
I'th' Ship-mans Card.
All the Quarters that they know,
And the very Ports they blow,
   1. I my selfe haue all the other,

   3. And I another

   1. Th'art kinde

   2. Ile giue thee a Winde

Ile doe, Ile doe, and Ile doe
And like a Rat without a tayle,
But in a Syue Ile thither sayle,
Her Husband's to Aleppo gone, Master o'th' Tiger:
Aroynt thee, Witch, the rumpe-fed Ronyon cryes.
Giue me, quoth I.
And mouncht, & mouncht, and mouncht:
  1. A Saylors Wife had Chestnuts in her Lappe,
   3. Sister, where thou?

  2. Killing Swine
  1. Where hast thou beene, Sister?

Thunder. Enter the three Witches.

Scena Tertia.


Exeunt.

   King. What he hath lost, Noble Macbeth hath wonne.

   Rosse. Ile see it done

And with his former Title greet Macbeth
Our Bosome interest: Goe pronounce his present death,
   King. No more that Thane of Cawdor shall deceiue

Ten thousand Dollars, to our generall vse
Till he disbursed, at Saint Colmes ynch,
Nor would we deigne him buriall of his men,
Craues composition:
   Rosse. That now Sweno, the Norwayes King,

   King. Great happinesse

The Victorie fell on vs
Curbing his lauish spirit: and to conclude,
Point against Point, rebellious Arme 'gainst Arme,
Confronted him with selfe-comparisons,
Till that Bellona's Bridegroome, lapt in proofe,
The Thane of Cawdor, began a dismall Conflict,
Assisted by that most disloyall Traytor,
Norway himselfe, with terrible numbers,
And fanne our people cold.
Where the Norweyan Banners flowt the Skie,
  Rosse. From Fiffe, great King,
   King. Whence cam'st thou, worthy Thane?

   Rosse. God saue the King

So should he looke, that seemes to speake things strange
   Lenox. What a haste lookes through his eyes?

  Mal. The worthy Thane of Rosse
Who comes here?

Enter Rosse and Angus.
They smack of Honor both: Goe get him Surgeons.
   King. So well thy words become thee, as thy wounds,

My Gashes cry for helpe
I cannot tell: but I am faint,
Or memorize another Golgotha,
Except they meant to bathe in reeking Wounds,
So they doubly redoubled stroakes vpon the Foe:
As Cannons ouer-charg'd with double Cracks,
If I say sooth, I must report they were
Or the Hare, the Lyon:
  Cap. Yes, as Sparrowes, Eagles;
Banquoh?
   King. Dismay'd not this our Captaines, Macbeth and

Began a fresh assault
With furbusht Armes, and new supplyes of men,
But the Norweyan Lord, surueying vantage,
Compell'd these skipping Kernes to trust their heeles,
No sooner Iustice had, with Valour arm'd,
Discomfort swells: Marke King of Scotland, marke,
So from that Spring, whence comfort seem'd to come,
Shipwracking Stormes, and direfull Thunders:
   Cap. As whence the Sunne 'gins his reflection,

   King. O valiant Cousin, worthy Gentleman

And fix'd his Head vpon our Battlements
Till he vnseam'd him from the Naue toth' Chops,
Which neu'r shooke hands, nor bad farwell to him,
Till hee fac'd the Slaue:
(Like Valours Minion) caru'd out his passage,
Which smoak'd with bloody execution
Disdayning Fortune, with his brandisht Steele,
For braue Macbeth (well hee deserues that Name)
Shew'd like a Rebells Whore: but all's too weake:
And Fortune on his damned Quarry smiling,
Of Kernes and Gallowgrosses is supply'd,
Doe swarme vpon him) from the Westerne Isles
The multiplying Villanies of Nature
(Worthie to be a Rebell, for to that
And choake their Art: The mercilesse Macdonwald
As two spent Swimmers, that doe cling together,
   Cap. Doubtfull it stood,

As thou didst leaue it
Say to the King, the knowledge of the Broyle,
'Gainst my Captiuitie: Haile braue friend;
Who like a good and hardie Souldier fought
   Mal. This is the Serieant,

The newest state
As seemeth by his plight, of the Reuolt
  King. What bloody man is that? he can report,

meeting a bleeding Captaine.
attendants,
Alarum within. Enter King Malcome, Donalbaine, Lenox, with

Scena Secunda.


Exeunt.

Houer through the fogge and filthie ayre.
   All. Padock calls anon: faire is foule, and foule is faire,

   1. I come, Gray-Malkin

   3. There to meet with Macbeth

  2. Vpon the Heath
   1. Where the place?

   3. That will be ere the set of Sunne

When the Battaile's lost, and wonne
  2. When the Hurley-burley's done,
In Thunder, Lightning, or in Raine?
  1. When shall we three meet againe?

Thunder and Lightning. Enter three Witches.

Actus Primus. Scoena Prima.

The Tragedie of Macbeth
THE TRAGEDIE OF Othello, the Moore of Venice.

Bianca, a Curtezan.
Aemilia, Wife to Iago.
Desdemona, Wife to Othello.
Clowne.
Saylors.
Lodouico, and Gratiano, two Noble Venetians.
Gentlemen of Cyprus.
Montano, Gouernour of Cyprus.
Senators.
Duke of Venice.
Rodorigo, a gull'd Gentleman.
Iago, a Villaine.
Cassio, an Honourable Lieutenant.
Brabantio, Father to Desdemona.
Othello, the Moore.

The Names of the Actors.

FINIS.


Exeunt.

This heauie Act, with heauie heart relate.
My selfe will straight aboord, and to the State,
The Time, the Place, the Torture, oh inforce it:
Remaines the Censure of this hellish villaine:
For they succeede on you. To you, Lord Gouernor,
And seize vpon the Fortunes of the Moore,
Let it be hid. Gratiano, keepe the house,
The Obiect poysons Sight,
This is thy worke:
Looke on the Tragicke Loading of this bed:
More fell then Anguish, Hunger, or the Sea:
   Lod. Oh Sparton Dogge:

For he was great of heart
  Cas. This did I feare, but thought he had no weapon:

Dyes

Killing my selfe, to dye vpon a kisse.
   Oth. I kist thee, ere I kill'd thee: No way but this,

   Gra. All that is spoke, is marr'd

   Lod. Oh bloody period

And smoate him, thus
I tooke by th' throat the circumcised Dogge,
Beate a Venetian, and traduc'd the State,
Where a malignant, and a Turbond-Turke
And say besides, that in Aleppo once,
Their Medicinable gumme. Set you downe this:
Drops teares as fast as the Arabian Trees
Albeit vn-vsed to the melting moode,
Richer then all his Tribe: Of one, whose subdu'd Eyes,
(Like the base Iudean) threw a Pearle away
Perplexed in the extreame: Of one, whose hand
Of one, not easily Iealious, but being wrought,
Of one that lou'd not wisely, but too well:
Then must you speake,
Nor set downe ought in malice.
Speake of me, as I am. Nothing extenuate,
When you shall these vnluckie deeds relate,
No more of that. I pray you in your Letters,
I haue done the State some seruice, and they know't:
   Oth. Soft you; a word or two before you goe:

To the Venetian State. Come, bring away
Till that the Nature of your fault be knowne
It shall be his. You shall close Prisoner rest,
That can torment him much, and hold him long,
If there be any cunning Crueltie,
And Cassio rules in Cyprus. For this Slaue,
Your Power, and your Command is taken off,
   Lod. You must forsake this roome, and go with vs:

Iago set him on
(After long seeming dead) Iago hurt him,
That I was cast: and euen but now he spake
Braue me vpon the Watch: whereon it came
How he vpbraides Iago, that he made him
  Cassio. There is besides, in Rodorigo's Letter,
   Othel. O Foole, foole, foole!

Which wrought to his desire
That there he dropt it for a speciall purpose,
And he himselfe confest it but euen now,
  Cassio. I found it in my Chamber:
That was my wiues?
How came you (Cassio) by that Handkerchiefe
   Oth. Oh thou pernitious Caitiffe;

Came in, and satisfi'd him
But that (belike) Iago in the interim
Rodorigo meant t'haue sent this damned villaine:
Found in his pocket too: and this it seemes
   Lod. Now, heere's another discontented paper

  Cassio. Most Heathenish, and most grosse
   Oth. O Villaine!

By Rodorigo
The death of Cassio, to be vndertooke
And heere another, the one of them imports
Found in the pocket of the slaine Rodorigo,
(Which, as I thinke, you know not) heere is a Letter
You shall vnderstand what hath befalne,
   Lod. Sir,

   Oth. Well, thou dost best

  Gra. Torments will ope your lips
   Lod. What? not to pray?

From this time forth, I neuer will speake word
   Iag. Demand me nothing: what you know, you know:

Why he hath thus ensnar'd my Soule and Body
Will you, I pray, demand that demy-Diuell,
   Oth. I do beleeue it, and I aske your pardon:

   Cas. Deere Generall, I neuer gaue you cause

   Oth. I

Did you and he consent in Cassio's death
   Lod. This wretch hath part confest his Villany:

For nought I did in hate, but all in Honour
An honourable Murderer, if you will:
   Oth. Why any thing:

What shall be saide to thee
Falne in the practise of a cursed Slaue,
   Lod. Oh thou Othello, that was once so good,

For in my sense, 'tis happinesse to die
   Othel. I am not sorry neither, Il'd haue thee liue:

   Iago. I bleed Sir, but not kill'd

   Lod. Wrench his Sword from him

If that thou bee'st a Diuell, I cannot kill thee
   Oth. I look down towards his feet; but that's a Fable,

Bring the Villaine forth
   Lod. Where is that Viper?

  Oth. That's he that was Othello: heere I am
  Lod. Where is this rash, and most vnfortunate man?

Enter Lodouico, Cassio, Montano, and Iago, with Officers.
Oh Desdemon! dead Desdemon: dead. Oh, oh!
Wash me in steepe-downe gulfes of Liquid fire.
Blow me about in windes, roast me in Sulphure,
From the possession of this Heauenly sight:
Whip me ye Diuels,
Euen like thy Chastity. O cursed, cursed Slaue!
And Fiends will snatch at it. Cold, cold, my Girle?
This looke of thine will hurle my Soule from Heauen,
Pale as thy Smocke: when we shall meete at compt,
Now: how dost thou looke now? Oh ill-Starr'd wench,
And he retires. Where should Othello go?
Man but a Rush against Othello's brest,
Do you go backe dismaid? 'Tis a lost feare:
And verie Sea-marke of my vtmost Saile.
Heere is my iournies end, heere is my butt
Be not affraid, though you do see me weapon'd:
Who can controll his Fate? 'Tis not so now.
Then twenty times your stop. But (oh vaine boast)
I haue made my way through more impediments
That with this little Arme, and this good Sword,
Vpon a Soldiers Thigh. I haue seene the day,
A better neuer did it selfe sustaine
  Othel. Behold, I haue a weapon:
   Gra. What is the matter?

Or naked as I am I will assault thee
   Oth. Looke in vpon me then, and speake with me,

Thou hast no weapon, and perforce must suffer
   Gra. If thou attempt it, it will cost thee deere;

Oh heere it is: Vnkle I must come forth
It was a Sword of Spaine, the Ice brookes temper:
   Oth. I haue another weapon in this Chamber,

So speaking as I thinke, alas, I dye
So come my Soule to blisse, as I speake true:
Moore, she was chaste: She lou'd thee, cruell Moore,
And dye in Musicke: Willough, Willough, Willough.
Hearke, canst thou heare me? I will play the Swan,
Aemil. What did thy Song boad Lady?
Let it go all.
But why should Honor out-liue Honesty?
But euery Punie whipster gets my Sword.
  Oth. I am not valiant neither:

Enter.
For 'tis a damned Slaue.
But kill him rather. Ile after that same villaine,
Come guard the doore without, let him not passe,
Which I haue recouer'd from the Moore:
   Mon. 'Tis a notorious Villain: take you this weapon

   Gra. Hee's gone, but his wife's kill'd

   Emil. I, I: oh lay me by my Mistris side

Sure he hath kill'd his Wife
   Gra. The woman falles:

Precious Villaine
But what serues for the Thunder?
  Oth. Are there no stones in Heauen,
Do with so good a wife?
Oh murd'rous Coxcombe, what should such a Foole
   Emil. By Heauen I do not, I do not Gentlemen:

   Iago. Filth, thou lyest

And I did giu't my Husband
   Emil. She giue it Cassio? No, alas I found it,

   Iago. Villanous Whore

He begg'd of me, to steale't
(More then indeed belong'd to such a Trifle)
For often, with a solemne earnestnesse,
I found by Fortune, and did giue my Husband:
That Handkerchiefe thou speak'st of
   Emil. Oh thou dull Moore,

   Gra. Fye, your Sword vpon a Woman

   Emil. I will not

   Iago. Be wise, and get you home

All, all, crie shame against me, yet Ile speake
Let Heauen, and Men, and Diuels, let them all,
No, I will speake as liberall as the North;
   Emil. 'Twill out, 'twill out. I peace?

  Iago. Come, hold your peace
   Emil. Oh Heauen! oh heauenly Powres!

My Father gaue my Mother
It was a Handkerchiefe, an Antique Token
Which I first gaue her: I saw it in his hand:
With that Recognizance and pledge of Loue
And she did gratifie his amorous workes
A thousand times committed. Cassio confest it,
That she with Cassio, hath the Act of shame
   Oth. 'Tis pittifull: but yet Iago knowes

And fall to Reprobance
Yea, curse his better Angell from his side,
This sight would make him do a desperate turne:
Shore his old thred in twaine. Did he liue now,
Thy Match was mortall to him: and pure greefe
I am glad thy Father's dead,
   Gra. Poore Desdemon:

I know this acte shewes horrible and grim
Whose breath (indeed) these hands haue newly stopp'd:
I scarse did know you Vnkle, there lies your Neece,
   Oth. Oh she was fowle!

That ere did lift vp eye
For thou hast kill'd the sweetest innocent,
   Emil. Nay, lay thee downe, and roare:

   Oth. Oh, oh, oh

Perchance Iago, I will ne're go home
'Tis proper I obey him; but not now:
   Emil. Good Gentlemen, let me haue leaue to speake:

I charge you get you home
  Iago. What, are you mad?
O villany! villany!
I thought so then: Ile kill my selfe for greefe.
I thinke vpon't, I thinke: I smel't: O Villany:
   Emil. Villany, villany, villany:

   Mont. O monstrous Acte

   Gra. 'Tis a strange Truth

It is true indeede
   Othello. Nay stare not Masters,

   Emil. And your reports haue set the Murder on

   All. Oh Heauens, forefend

My Mistris heere lyes murthered in her bed
I am bound to speake,
   Emil. I will not charme my Tongue;

Go too, charme your tongue
  Iago. With Cassio, Mistris?
Did you say with Cassio?
Shee false with Cassio?
Vpon my Soule, a Lye; a wicked Lye.
Aemil. You told a Lye an odious damned Lye:
  Iago. I did.
She was false?
Aemil. But did you euer tell him,
Then what he found himselfe was apt, and true.
And told no more
   Iago. I told him what I thought,

Speake, for my heart is full
I know thou did'st not: thou'rt not such a Villain.
He sayes, thou told'st him that his wife was false:
Aemil. Disproue this Villaine, if thou bee'st a man:
   Gra. What is the matter?

That men must lay their Murthers on your necke
Aemil. Oh, are you come, Iago: you haue done well,
  Mon. What is the matter? How now Generall?

Enter Montano, Gratiano, and Iago.
The Moore hath kill'd my Mistris. Murther, murther.
Though I lost twenty liues. Helpe, helpe, hoa, helpe:
(I care not for thy Sword) Ile make thee known,
As ignorant as durt: thou hast done a deed
As I haue to be hurt. Oh Gull, oh dolt,
Aemil. Thou hast not halfe that powre to do me harm,
   Oth. Peace, you were best.

Then thou was't worthy her
This deede of thine is no more worthy Heauen,
Aemil. Do thy worst:
   Oth. Hah?

She was too fond of her most filthy Bargaine
Rot halfe a graine a day: he lyes to'th' heart,
Aemil. If he say so, may his pernicious Soule
My Friend, thy Husband; honest, honest Iago.
I say thy Husband: Do'st vnderstand the word?
  Oth. He, Woman;
My Husband say she was false?
Villany hath made mockes with loue:
Aemil. Oh Mistris,
I say, thy Husband.
  Oth. What needs this itterance, Woman?
Aemil. My Husband?
That stickes on filthy deeds.
An honest man he is, and hates the slime
  Oth. I, 'twas he that told me on her first,
Aemil. My Husband?
I'ld not haue sold her for it.
Of one entyre and perfect Chrysolite,
If Heauen would make me such another world,
  Oth. I, with Cassio: had she bin true,
Aemil. That she was false to Wedlocke?
  Oth. Thy Husband.
Aemil. My Husband?
To this extremity. Thy Husband knew it all.
But that I did proceed vpon iust grounds
O, I were damn'd beneath all depth in hell:
   Oth. Cassio did top her: Ask thy husband else.

That she was false. Oh she was heauenly true
Aemil. Thou art rash as fire, to say
   Oth. She was false as water.

Aemil. Thou do'st bely her, and thou art a diuell
   Oth. She turn'd to folly: and she was a whore.

Diuell
Aemil. Oh the more Angell she, and you the blacker
'Twas I that kill'd her.
   Oth. She's like a Liar gone to burning hell,

Aemil. She said so: I must needs report the truth
  Oth. You heare her say her selfe, it was not I.
Aemil. Alas: who knowes?
   Oth. Why, how should she be murdred?

Commend me to my kinde Lord: oh farewell
  Des. No body: I my selfe, farewell:
Aemil. Oh who hath done this deed?
   Des. A guiltlesse death, I dye.

Sweet Desdemona, oh sweet Mistris, speake
Helpe, helpe hoa, helpe. Oh Ladie speake againe,
Aemil. Out, and alas, that was my Ladies voice.
  Oth. That? What?
Aemil. Alas! what cry is that?
   Des. O falsely, falsely murder'd.

And sweet Reuenge growes harsh
   Oth. Not Cassio kill'd? Then Murther's out of tune,

Aemil. No, Cassio is not kill'd
   Oth. Rodorigo kill'd? and Cassio kill'd?

A young Venetian, call'd Rodorigo
Aemil. Cassio, my Lord, hath kill'd
And makes men mad.
She comes more neerer Earth then she was wont,
   Oth. It is the very error of the Moone,

Aemil. But now, my Lord
   Oth. What? now?

done
Aemil. Oh my good Lord, yonders foule Murthers

Enter aemilia.
Where art thou? What's the matter with thee now?
Soft, by and by, let me the Curtaines draw.
   Oth. I had forgot thee: oh come in aemilia.

That I may speake with you. Oh good my Lord
Aemil. I do beseech you
Did yawne at Alteration.
Of Sunne, and Moone; and that th' affrighted Globe
Me thinkes, it should be now a huge Eclipse
Oh insupportable! Oh heauy houre!
My wife, my wife: what wife? I haue no wife.
If she come in, shee'l sure speake to my wife:
I thinke she stirres againe. No, what's best to do?
Still as the Graue. Shall she come in? Wer't good?
The noise was high. Hah, no more moouing?
'Tis like she comes to speake of Cassio's death:
   Oth. Yes: 'Tis aemilia: by and by. Shee's dead.

with you
Aemil. Oh good my Lord, I would speake a word
  Oth. Who's there?
Aemil. within. What hoa? my Lord, my Lord?
So, so.
I would not haue thee linger in thy paine?
I that am cruell, am yet mercifull,
   Oth. What noise is this? Not dead? not yet quite dead?

My Lord, my Lord
Aemil. My Lord, my Lord? What hoa?

aemilia at the doore.

Smothers her.

   Oth. It is too late.

   Des. But while I say one prayer

   Oth. Being done, there is no pawse

   Des. But halfe an houre

   Oth. Nay, if you striue

   Des. Kill me to morrow, let me liue to night

   Oth. Downe Strumpet

  Des. O banish me, my Lord, but kill me not
   Oth. Out Strumpet: weep'st thou for him to my face?

   Des. Alas, he is betray'd, and I vndone

Had stomacke for them all
  Oth. Had all his haires bin liues, my great Reuenge
   Des. Oh, my feare interprets. What is he dead?

Honest Iago hath 'tane order for't
   Oth. No: his mouth is stopp'd:

   Des. He will not say so

  Oth. I
   Des. How? vnlawfully?

  Oth. That he hath vs'd thee
   Des. What, my Lord?

   Oth. He hath confest

Let him confesse a truth
I neuer gaue it him: Send, for him hither:
   Des. He found it then:

I saw the Handkerchiefe
A Murther, which I thought a Sacrifice.
And makes me call, what I intend to do,
O periur'd woman, thou do'st stone my heart,
   Oth. By Heauen I saw my Handkerchiefe in's hand.

As I might loue. I neuer gaue him Token
But with such generall warrantie of Heauen,
Offend you in my life: neuer lou'd Cassio,
   Des. And haue you mercy too. I neuer did

   Oth. I say, Amen

   Des. O Heauen haue mercy on me

That I do grone withall. Thou art to dye
Cannot remoue, nor choake the strong Conception
For to deny each Article with Oath,
Therefore confesse thee freely of thy sinne:
   Oth. Presently.

   Des. I, but not yet to dye

Thou art on thy death-bed
   Oth. Sweet Soule, take heed, take heed of Periury,

And aske him
   Des. No by my Life, and Soule: send for the man,

Which I so lou'd, and gaue thee, thou gau'st to Cassio
  Oth. That Handkerchiefe
   Des. I will so: What's the matter?

   Oth. Peace, and be still

They do not point on me
These are portents: but yet I hope, I hope,
Some bloody passion shakes your very Frame:
Alas, why gnaw you so your nether-lip?
   Des. That death's vnnaturall, that kils for louing.

   Oth. I, and for that thou dy'st

   Des. They are Loues I beare to you

   Oth. Thinke on thy sinnes

Since guiltinesse I know not: But yet I feele I feare
Why I should feare, I know not,
When your eyes rowle so.
   Des. And yet I feare you: for you're fatall then

   Oth. Humh

   Des. If you say, I hope you will not kill me

   Oth. Amen, with all my heart

   Des. Then Heauen haue mercy on mee

  Oth. I, I do
   Des. Talke you of killing?

No, Heauens fore-fend) I would not kill thy Soule
I would not kill thy vnprepared Spirit,
  Oth. Well, do it, and be breefe, I will walke by:
What may you meane by that?
   Des. Alacke, my Lord,

Solicite for it straight
Vnreconcil'd as yet to Heauen, and Grace,
   Oth. If you bethinke your selfe of any Crime

  Des. I my Lord
  Oth. Haue you pray'd to night, Desdemon?
   Des. Will you come to bed, my Lord?

  Othel. I Desdemona
   Des. Who's there? Othello?

It strikes, where it doth loue. She wakes
But they are cruell Teares: This sorrow's heauenly,
So sweet, was ne're so fatall. I must weepe,
And loue thee after. One more, and that's the last.
Be thus when thou art dead, and I will kill thee,
Iustice to breake her Sword. One more, one more:
Oh Balmy breath, that dost almost perswade
It needs must wither. Ile smell thee on the Tree.
I cannot giue it vitall growth againe,
When I haue pluck'd thy Rose,
That can thy Light re-Lume.
I know not where is that Promethaean heate
Thou cunning'st Patterne of excelling Nature,
Should I repent me. But once put out thy Light,
I can againe thy former light restore,
If I quench thee, thou flaming Minister,
Put out the Light, and then put out the Light:
Yet she must dye, else shee'l betray more men:
And smooth as Monumentall Alablaster:
Nor scarre that whiter skin of hers, then Snow,
It is the Cause. Yet Ile not shed her blood,
Let me not name it to you, you chaste Starres,
  Oth. It is the Cause, it is the Cause (my Soule)

Enter Othello, and Desdemona in her bed.

Scoena Secunda.

Exeunt.

That either makes me, or foredoes me quight.
Will you go on afore? This is the night
And tell my Lord and Lady, what hath happ'd:
aemilia, run you to the Cittadell,
Come Mistris, you must tel's another Tale.
Let's go see poore Cassio drest.
   Iago. Kinde Gentlemen:

Aemil. As I? Fie vpon thee
As you that thus abuse me.
   Bian. I am no Strumpet, but of life as honest,

Aemil. Oh fie vpon thee Strumpet
   Iago. O did he so? I charge you go with me.

  Bian. He supt at my house, but I therefore shake not
What, do you shake at that?
Go know of Cassio where he supt to night.
   Iago. This is the fruits of whoring. Prythe aemilia,

Aemil. Alas good Gentleman: alas good Cassio
He's almost slaine, and Rodorigo quite dead.
By Rodorigo, and Fellowes that are scap'd:
  Iago. Cassio hath heere bin set on in the darke
What is the matter, Husband?
Aemil. Alas, what is the matter?
Though tongues were out of vse.
Do you see Gentlemen? Nay, guiltinesse will speake
Behold her well: I pray you looke vpon her:
Nay, if you stare, we shall heare more anon.
Do you perceiue the gastnesse of her eye?
Stay you good Gentlemen. Looke you pale, Mistris?
  Iago. What? looke you pale? Oh beare him o'th' Ayre.
   Cas. None in the world: nor do I know the man?

Was my deere friend. What malice was between you
Saue you your labour. He that lies slaine heere (Cassio)
Ile fetch the Generall's Surgeon. For you Mistris,
Some good man beare him carefully from hence,
Oh that's well said, the Chaire.
  Iago. He, he, 'tis he:
   Gra. Rodorigo?

   Iago. How do you Cassio? Oh, a Chaire, a Chaire

   Gra. I am glad to see you

That so neglected you
These bloody accidents must excuse my Manners,
   Iago. Signior Gratiano? I cry your gentle pardon:

  Gra. Know him? I
  Iago. Euen he Sir: Did you know him?
   Gra. What, of Venice?

Rodorigo? No: Yes sure: Yes, 'tis Rodorigo
Alas my Friend, and my deere Countryman
Lend me a Light: know we this face, or no?
Patience awhile, good Cassio. Come, come;
To be a party in this Iniurie.
   Iago. Gentlemen all, I do suspect this Trash

   Bian. Alas he faints. Oh Cassio, Cassio, Cassio

To beare him easily hence
   Iago. Lend me a Garter. So: - Oh for a Chaire

I haue beene to seeke you
   Gra. I am sorry to finde you thus;

  Cas. No
Who they should be, that haue thus mangled you?
   Iago. O notable Strumpet. Cassio, may you suspect

My sweet Cassio: Oh Cassio, Cassio, Cassio
  Bian. Oh my deere Cassio,
  Iago. Who is't that cry'd?
  Bian. What is the matter hoa? Who is't that cry'd?

Enter Bianca.
Light Gentlemen, Ile binde it with my shirt.
   Iago. Marry heauen forbid:

  Cas. My Legge is cut in two
  Iago. How is't Brother?
   Gra. Cassio?

   Iago. I cry you mercy: here's Cassio hurt by Villaines

  Lod. He Sir
   Iago. Signior Lodouico?

  Lod. As you shall proue vs, praise vs
What may you be? Are you of good, or euill?
How silent is this Towne? Hoa, murther, murther.
Where be these bloody Theeues?
  Iago. Kill men i'th' darke?
  Rod. O damn'd Iago! O inhumane Dogge!
   Iago. Oh murd'rous Slaue! O Villaine!

   Cassio. That's one of them

   Rod. O helpe me there

What are you there? Come in, and giue some helpe
   Iago. Oh treacherous Villaines:

And cannot make away
  Cas. I thinke that one of them is heereabout.
What Villaines haue done this?
   Iago. O mee, Lieutenant!

Giue me some helpe
  Cas. Iago? Oh I am spoyl'd, vndone by Villaines:
   Iago. What are you heere, that cry so greeuously?

   Lodo. The same indeede, a very valiant Fellow

  Gra. This is Othello's Ancient, as I take it
   Iago. What's the matter?

  Cas. Heere, heere: for heauen sake helpe me
   Iago. Do not you heare a cry?

  Lodo. We do not know
Who's noyse is this that cries on murther?
   Iago. Who's there?

Weapons
   Gra. Here's one comes in his shirt, with Light, and

  Lod. Hearke

Enter Iago.
   Rod. Nobody come: then shall I bleed to death.

To come into the cry, without more helpe
These may be counterfeits: Let's think't vnsafe
   Lod. Two or three groane. 'Tis heauy night;

   Rod. Oh wretched Villaine

   Lodo. Hearke

   Cas. Oh helpe

   Gra. 'Tis some mischance, the voyce is very direfull

Murther, Murther
  Cas. What hoa? no Watch? No passage?

Enter Lodouico and Gratiano.

Exit Othello.

Thy Bed lust-stain'd, shall with Lusts blood bee spotted.
For of my heart, those Charmes thine Eyes, are blotted.
And your vnblest Fate highes: Strumpet I come:
Thou teachest me. Minion, your deere lyes dead,
That hast such Noble sense of thy Friends wrong,
   Oth. 'Tis he: O braue Iago, honest, and iust,

   Cas. Oh helpe hoa: Light, a Surgeon

   Oth. It is euen so

   Rod. O Villaine that I am

  Oth. The voyce of Cassio. Iago keepes his word

Enter Othello.
Helpe hoa: Murther, murther.
   Cassio. I am maym'd for euer:

   Rod. Oh, I am slaine

I will make proofe of thine
But that my Coate is better then thou know'st:
   Cas. That thrust had beene mine enemy indeed,

  Rod. I know his gate, 'tis he: Villaine thou dyest

Enter Cassio.
No, he must dye. But so, I heard him comming.
May vnfold me to him: there stand I in much perill:
That makes me vgly: and besides, the Moore
He hath a dayly beauty in his life,
It must not be: If Cassio do remaine,
As Guifts to Desdemona.
Of Gold, and Iewels, that I bob'd from him,
He calles me to a restitution large
Euery way makes my gaine. Liue Rodorigo,
Or Cassio him, or each do kill the other,
And he growes angry. Now, whether he kill Cassio,
   Iago. I haue rub'd this yong Quat almost to the sense,

'Tis but a man gone. Forth my Sword: he dies
And yet he hath giuen me satisfying Reasons:
   Rod. I haue no great deuotion to the deed,

   Iago. Heere, at thy hand: Be bold, & take thy stand

   Rod. Be neere at hand, I may miscarry in't

And fixe most firme thy Resolution
It makes vs, or it marres vs, thinke on that,
Quicke, quicke, feare nothing; Ile be at thy Elbow,
Weare thy good Rapier bare, and put it home:
Straight will he come:
  Iago. Heere, stand behinde this Barke,

Enter Iago, and Rodorigo.

Actus Quintus. Scena Prima.

Exeunt.

Not to picke bad, from bad; but by bad, mend.
Heauen me such vses send,
   Des. Good night, good night:

The illes we do, their illes instruct vs so
Then let them vse vs well: else let them know,
Desires for Sport? and Frailty, as men haue?
It is so too. And haue not we Affections?
I thinke it doth. Is't Frailty that thus erres?
I thinke it is: and doth Affection breed it?
When they change vs for others? Is it Sport?
As Husbands haue. What is it that they do,
And haue their Palats both for sweet, and sowre,
Their wiues haue sense like them: They see, and smell,
Yet haue we some Reuenge. Let Husbands know,
Why we haue galles: and though we haue some Grace,
Or scant our former hauing in despight)
Throwing restraint vpon vs: Or say they strike vs,
Or else breake out in peeuish Iealousies,
And powre our Treasures into forraigne laps;
If Wiues do fall: (Say, that they slacke their duties,
But I do thinke it is their Husbands faults
would store the world they plaid for.
Aemil. Yes, a dozen: and as many to'th' vantage, as
   Des. I do not thinke there is any such woman.

your owne world, and you might quickly make it right
and hauing the world for your labour, 'tis a wrong in
Aemil. Why, the wrong is but a wrong i'th' world;
For the whole world.
   Des. Beshrew me, if I would do such a wrong

Purgatory for't
a Cuckold, to make him a Monarch? I should venture
all the whole world: why, who would not make her husband
Petticoats, nor Caps, nor any petty exhibition. But for
ioynt Ring, nor for measures of Lawne, nor for Gownes,
I had done. Marry, I would not doe such a thing for a
Aemil. Introth I thinke I should, and vndoo't when
   Des. Introth, I thinke thou would'st not.

It is a great price, for a small vice
Aemil. The world's a huge thing:
   Des. Would'st thou do such a deed for al the world?

I might doo't as well i'th' darke
Aemil. Nor I neither, by this Heauenly light:
  Des. No, by this Heauenly light.
Aemil. Why, would not you?
   Des. Would'st thou do such a deed for all the world?

Aemil. There be some such, no question
In such grosse kinde?
That there be women do abuse their husbands
Do'st thou in conscience thinke (tell me aemilia)
   Des. I haue heard it said so. O these Men, these men!

Aemil. 'Tis neyther heere, nor there
Doth that boade weeping?
So get thee gone, good night: mine eyes do itch:
If I court mo women, you'le couch with mo men.
Sing Willough, &c.
   Des. I call'd my Loue false Loue: but what said he then?

Aemil. It's the wind
(Nay that's not next. Harke, who is't that knocks?
Let no body blame him, his scorne I approue.
Sing all a greene Willough must be my Garland.
Willough, Willough. (Prythee high thee: he'le come anon)
Sing Willough, &c. (Lay by these)
Her salt teares fell from her, and softned the stones,
Sing Willough, &c.
The fresh Streames ran by her, and murmur'd her moanes
Sing Willough, Willough, Willough.
Her hand on her bosome her head on her knee,
Sing all a greene Willough:
   Des. The poore Soule sat singing, by a Sicamour tree.

barefoot to Palestine for a touch of his nether lip
Aemil. I know a Lady in Venice would haue walk'd
   Des. He speakes well.

Aemil. A very handsome man
This Lodouico is a proper man.
  Des. No, vn-pin me here,
   Aemi. Shall I go fetch your Night-gowne?

And sing it like poore Barbarie: prythee dispatch
But to go hang my head all at one side
Will not go from my mind: I haue much to do,
And she dy'd singing it. That Song to night,
An old thing 'twas: but it express'd her Fortune,
And did forsake her. She had a Song of Willough,
She was in loue: and he she lou'd prou'd mad,
   Des. My Mother had a Maid call'd Barbarie,

Aemil. Come, come: you talke
In one of these same Sheetes.
If I do die before, prythee shrow'd me
   Des. All's one: good Father, how foolish are our minds?

   Aemi. I haue laid those Sheetes you bad me on the bed

(Prythee vn-pin me) haue grace and fauour
That euen his stubbornesse, his checks, his frownes,
   Des. So would not I: my loue doth so approue him,

Aemil. I, would you had neuer seene him
We must not now displease him.
Giue me my nightly wearing, and adieu.
  Des. It was his bidding: therefore good aemilia,
   Aemi. Dismisse me?

And bid me to dismisse you
And hath commanded me to go to bed,
   Des. He saies he will returne incontinent,

   Aem. How goes it now? He lookes gentler then he did

  Des. I will my Lord

Enter.
be done.
forthwith: dismisse your Attendant there: look't
   Othello. Get you to bed on th' instant, I will be return'd

   Des. My Lord

   Oth. Will you walke Sir? Oh Desdemona

   Des. Your Honour is most welcome

Ladyship
   Lodoui. Madam, good night: I humbly thanke your

   Oth. Oh pardon me: 'twill do me good to walke

  Lod. I do beseech you Sir, trouble your selfe no further

Enter Othello, Lodouico, Desdemona, aemilia, and Atendants.

Scena Tertia.


Exeunt.

   Iago. And you shalbe satisfi'd.

   Rod. I will heare further reason for this

About it
is now high supper time: and the night growes to wast.
you shall thinke your selfe bound to put it on him. It
me: I will shew you such a necessitie in his death, that
vs. Come, stand not amaz'd at it, but go along with
to second your Attempt, and he shall fall betweene
you may take him at your pleasure. I will be neere
I will fashion to fall out betweene twelue and one)
Fortune, if you will watch his going thence (which
will I go to him. He knowes not yet of his Honourable
right. He sups to night with a Harlotry: and thither
   Iago. I: if you dare do your selfe a profit, and a

   Rod. And that you would haue me to do

place: knocking out his braines
  Iago. Why, by making him vncapable of Othello's
   Rod. How do you meane remouing him?

Cassio
none can be so determinate, as the remouing of
be lingred heere by some accident. Wherein
away with him the faire Desdemona, vnlesse his abode
   Iago. Oh no: he goes into Mauritania and taketh

returne againe to Venice
   Rod. Is that true? Why then Othello and Desdemona

Venice to depute Cassio in Othello's place
  Iago. Sir, there is especiall Commission come from
   Rod. Well: what is it? Is it within, reason and compasse?

and deuise Engines for my life
Desdemona, take me from this world with Treacherie,
shew it. If thou the next night following enioy not
meane purpose, Courage, and Valour) this night
I haue greater reason to beleeue now then euer (I
But Rodorigo, if thou hast that in thee indeed, which
your suspition is not without wit and iudgement.
   Iago. I grant indeed it hath not appeer'd: and

   Rod. It hath not appeer'd

Affaire
but yet I protest I haue dealt most directly in thy
Thou hast taken against me a most iust exception:
then euer before: giue me thy hand Rodorigo.
euen from this instant do build on thee a better opinion
   Iago. Why, now I see there's mettle in thee: and

of doing
   Rodo. I: and said nothing but what I protest intendment

   Iago. You haue said now

satisfaction of you
solicitation. If not, assure your selfe, I will seeke
Iewels, I will giue ouer my Suit, and repent my vnlawfull
selfe knowne to Desdemona. If she will returne me my
   Rodor. I tell you, 'tis not very well: I will make my

   Iago. Very well

finde my selfe fopt in it
'tis not very well. Nay I think it is scuruy: and begin to
   Rod. Very well, go too: I cannot go too, (man) nor

   Iago. Well, go too: very well

respect, and acquaintance, but I finde none
and return'd me expectations and comforts of sodaine
Votarist. You haue told me she hath receiu'd them,
me to deliuer Desdemona, would halfe haue corrupted a
selfe out of my meanes. The Iewels you haue had from
   Rodo. With naught but truth: I haue wasted my

   Iago. You charge me most vniustly

Performances are no kin together
  Rodori. I haue heard too much: and your words and
   Iago. Will you heare me Rodorigo?

haue foolishly suffred
am I yet perswaded to put vp in peace, what already I
of hope: I will indeed no longer endure it. Nor
me all conueniencie, then suppliest me with the least aduantage
Iago, and rather, as it seemes to me now, keep'st from
  Rodori. Euery day thou dafts me with some deuise
   Iago. What in the contrarie?

That thou deal'st iustly with me
  Rod. I do not finde
How now Rodorigo?

Enter Rodorigo.

Exeunt. Desdemona and aemilia.

Go in, and weepe not: all things shall be well.
The Messengers of Venice staies the meate,
Hearke how these Instruments summon to supper:
   Iago. It is but so, I warrant,

   Des. If 'twere no other

The businesse of the State do's him offence
   Iago. I pray you be content: 'tis but his humour:

Not the worlds Masse of vanitie could make me
To do the Act, that might the addition earne,
It do's abhorre me now I speake the word,
But neuer taynt my Loue. I cannot say Whore,
And his vnkindnesse may defeat my life,
Comfort forsweare me. Vnkindnesse may do much,
To beggerly diuorcement) Loue him deerely,
And euer will, (though he do shake me off
Or that I do not yet, and euer did,
Delighted them: or any other Forme.
Or that mine Eyes, mine Eares, or any Sence
Either in discourse of thought, or actuall deed,
If ere my will did trespasse 'gainst his Loue,
I know not how I lost him. Heere I kneele:
Good Friend, go to him: for by this light of Heauen,
What shall I do to win my Lord againe?
   Des. Alas Iago,

   Iago. You are a Foole: go too

And made you to suspect me with the Moore
That turn'd your wit, the seamy-side without,
Aemil. Oh fie vpon them: some such Squire he was
   Iago. Speake within doore.

Euen from the East to th' West
To lash the Rascalls naked through the world,
And put in euery honest hand a whip
Oh Heauens, that such companions thou'd'st vnfold,
Some base notorious Knaue, some scuruy Fellow.
The Moore's abus'd by some most villanous Knaue,
What Forme? What liklyhood?
What Place? What Time?
Who keepes her companie?
Why should he call her Whore?
And hell gnaw his bones.
Aemil. A halter pardon him:
   Des. If any such there be, Heauen pardon him.

   Iago. Fie, there is no such man: it is impossible

Haue not deuis'd this Slander: I will be hang'd else
Some cogging, cozening Slaue, to get some Office,
Some busie and insinuating Rogue,
   Aemi. I will be hang'd, if some eternall Villaine,

  Des. Nay, Heauen doth know
How comes this Tricke vpon him?
   Iago. Beshrew him for't:

  Des. It is my wretched Fortune
To be call'd Whore? Would it not make one weepe?
Her Father? And her Country? And her Friends?
Aemil. Hath she forsooke so many Noble Matches?
   Iago. Do not weepe, do not weepe: alas the day.

  Des. I do not know: I am sure I am none such
   Iago. Why did he so?

Could not haue laid such termes vpon his Callet
Aemil. He call'd her whore: a Begger in his drinke:
  Des. Such as she said my Lord did say I was.
  Iago. What name, (faire Lady?)
   Des. Am I that name, Iago?

That true hearts cannot beare it
Throwne such dispight, and heauy termes vpon her
Aemil. Alas (Iago) my Lord hath so bewhor'd her,
   Iago. What is the matter Lady?

I am a Child to chiding
He might haue chid me so; for in good faith
Do it with gentle meanes, and easie taskes.
  Des. I cannot tell: those that do teach yong Babes
How is't with you?
  Iago. What is your pleasure Madam?

Enter Iago, and aemilia.
The small'st opinion on my least misvse?
How haue I bin behau'd, that he might sticke
  Des. 'Tis meete I should be vs'd so: very meete.

Enter.
Aemil. Heere's a change indeed.
And call thy husband hither.
Lay on my bed my wedding sheetes, remember,
But what should go by water. Prythee to night,
I cannot weepe: nor answeres haue I none,
   Des. I haue none: do not talke to me, aemilia,

Aemil. He that is yours, sweet Lady
  Des. Who is thy Lord?
Aemil. Why, with my Lord, Madam?
  Des. With who?
What's the matter with my Lord?
   Aemi. Good Madam,

  Des. Faith, halfe a sleepe
How do you Madam? how do you my good Lady?
Aemil. Alas, what do's this Gentleman conceiue?

Enter.
I pray you turne the key, and keepe our counsaile.
We haue done our course: there's money for your paines:
And keepes the gate of hell. You, you: I you.
That haue the office opposite to Saint Peter,

Enter aemilia.
That married with Othello. You Mistris,
I tooke you for that cunning Whore of Venice,
   Othe. I cry you mercy then.

  Des. Oh Heauen forgiue vs
   Othe. Is't possible?

  Des. No, as I shall be sau'd
   Othe. What, not a Whore?

Be not to be a Strumpet, I am none
From any other foule vnlawfull touch
If to preserue this vessell for my Lord,
  Des. No, as I am a Christian.
   Othe. Are not you a Strumpet?

  Des. By Heauen you do me wrong
And will not hear't. What commited?
Is hush'd within the hollow Myne of Earth
The baudy winde that kisses all it meetes,
Heauen stoppes the Nose at it, and the Moone winks:
Did I but speake thy deedes. What commited?
That would to Cynders burne vp Modestie,
I should make very Forges of my cheekes,
Committed? Oh, thou publicke Commoner,
Made to write Whore vpon? What commited,
  Othe. Was this faire Paper? This most goodly Booke
   Des. Alas, what ignorant sin haue I committed?

Would thou had'st neuer bin borne
That the Sense akes at thee,
Who art so louely faire, and smell'st so sweete,
That quicken euen with blowing. Oh thou weed:
   Othe. Oh I, as Sommer Flyes are in the Shambles,

   Des. I hope my Noble Lord esteemes me honest

I heere looke grim as hell
Patience, thou young and Rose-lip'd Cherubin,
To knot and gender in. Turne thy complexion there:
Or keepe it as a Cesterne, for foule Toades
Or else dries vp: to be discarded thence,
The Fountaine from the which my currant runnes,
Where either I must liue, or beare no life,
But there where I haue garnerd vp my heart,
Yet could I beare that too, well, very well:
To point his slow, and mouing finger at.
The fixed Figure for the time of Scorne,
A drop of patience. But alas, to make me
I should haue found in some place of my Soule
Giuen to Captiuitie, me, and my vtmost hopes,
Steep'd me in pouertie to the very lippes.
All kind of Sores, and Shames on my bare-head:
To try me with Affliction, had they rain'd
   Othe. Had it pleas'd Heauen,

I haue lost him too
Lay not your blame on me: if you haue lost him,
An Instrument of this your calling backe,
If happely you my Father do suspect,
Am I the motiue of these teares my Lord?
   Des. Alas the heauy day: why do you weepe?

  Othe. Ah Desdemon, away, away, away
With whom? How am I false?
   Des. To whom my Lord?

   Othe. Heauen truely knowes, that thou art false as hell

   Des. Heauen doth truely know it

thou art honest
feare to ceaze thee. Therefore be double damn'd: sweare
being like one of Heauen, the diuells themselues should
   Othello. Come sweare it: damne thy selfe, least

  Des. Your wife my Lord: your true and loyall wife
   Othe. Why? What art thou?

I vnderstand a Fury in your words
  Des. Vpon my knee, what doth your speech import?

Exit aemi.

Your Mystery, your Mystery: May dispatch.
Cough, or cry hem; if any body come:
Leaue Procreants alone, and shut the doore:
  Othe. Some of your Function Mistris:
   Des. What horrible Fancie's this?

  Oth. Let me see your eyes: looke in my face
   Des. What is your pleasure?

  Othe. Pray you Chucke come hither
  Des. My Lord, what is your will?

Enter Desdemona, and aemilia.
And yet she'le kneele, and pray: I haue seene her do't.
A Closset Locke and Key of Villanous Secrets,
That cannot say as much. This is a subtile Whore:
She saies enough: yet she's a simple Baud

Exit aemilia.

   Othe. Bid her come hither: go.

Is foule as Slander
There's no man happy. The purest of their Wiues
For if she be not honest, chaste, and true,
Let Heauen requit it with the Serpents curse,
If any wretch haue put this in your head,
Remoue your thought. It doth abuse your bosome:
Lay downe my Soule at stake: If you thinke other,
Aemil. I durst (my Lord) to wager, she is honest:
   Othe. That's strange.

Aemil. Neuer my Lord
   Othe. To fetch her Fan, her Gloues, her Mask, nor nothing?

Aemil. Neuer
   Othe. Nor send you out o'th' way?

Aemil. Neuer my Lord
   Othe. What? Did they neuer whisper?

Each syllable that breath made vp betweene them
   Aemi. But then I saw no harme: and then I heard,

   Othe. Yes, you haue seene Cassio, and she together

Aemil. Nor euer heard: nor euer did suspect
  Othe. You haue seene nothing then?

Enter Othello and aemilia.

Scena Secunda.


Exeunt.

   Lod. I am sorry that I am deceiu'd in him.

And marke how he continues
That I may saue my speech: do but go after
And his owne courses will denote him so,
What I haue seene, and knowne. You shall obserue him,
It is not honestie in me to speake
  Iago. Alas, alas:
And new create his fault?
Or did the Letters, worke vpon his blood,
   Lod. Is it his vse?

That stroke would proue the worst
  Iago. 'Faith that was not so well: yet would I knew
   Lod. What? Strike his wife?

I would to heauen he were
What he might be: if what he might, he is not,
  Iago. He's that he is: I may not breath my censure.
   Lod. Are his wits safe? Is he not light of Braine?

  Iago. He is much chang'd
Could neither graze, nor pierce?
The shot of Accident, nor dart of Chance
Whom Passion could not shake? Whose solid vertue
Call all in all sufficient? Is this the Nature
  Lod. Is this the Noble Moore, whom our full Senate

Enter.
Goates, and Monkeys.
You are welcome Sir to Cyprus.
I do entreat, that we may sup together.
Cassio shall haue my Place. And Sir, to night
And will returne to Venice. Hence, auaunt:
Ile send for you anon. Sir I obey the Mandate,
I am commanded home: get you away:
Concerning this Sir, (oh well-painted passion)
Very obedient: proceed you in your teares.
And she's obedient: as you say obedient.
And turne againe. And she can weepe, Sir, weepe.
Sir, she can turne, and turne: and yet go on
  Othe. I, you did wish, that I would make her turne:
  Lod. Who I, my Lord?
   Othe. What would you with her, Sir?

   Des. My Lord

   Othe. Mistris

I do beseech your Lordship call her backe
   Lod. Truely obedient Lady:

   Des. I will not stay to offend you

Out of my sight
Each drop she falls, would proue a Crocodile:
If that the Earth could teeme with womans teares,
   Othe. Oh diuell, diuell:

Make her amends: she weepes
Though I should sweare I saw't. 'Tis very much,
   Lod. My Lord, this would not be beleeu'd in Venice,

   Des. I haue not deseru'd this

  Othe. Diuell
   Des. Why, sweete Othello?

  Othe. I am glad to see you mad
  Des. My Lord?
   Othe. Indeed?

   Des. Trust me, I am glad on't

Deputing Cassio in his Gouernment
For as I thinke, they do command him home,
  Lod. May be the Letter mou'd him.
  Des. What is he angrie?
   Oth. Are you wise?

   Des. My Lord

   Oth. Fire, and brimestone

T' attone, them, for the loue I beare to Cassio
  Des. A most vnhappy one: I would do much
Is there deuision 'twixt my Lord, and Cassio?
  Lod. He did not call: he's busie in the paper,
  Othe. This faile you not to do, as you will-
  Des. My Lord?
   Othe. Are you sure of that?

An vnkind breach: but you shall make all well
  Des. Cozen, there's falne betweene him, & my Lord,
  Iago. Liues Sir,
   Lod. I thanke you: how do's Lieutenant Cassio?

Welcome to Cyprus
  Iago. I am very glad to see you Signior:
   Des. And what's the newes, good cozen Lodouico

   Othe. I kisse the Instrument of their pleasures

   Lod. The Duke, and the Senators of Venice greet you

   Othe. With all my heart Sir

   Lodo. Saue you worthy Generall

See, your wife's with him
'Tis Lodouico, this, comes from the Duke.
  Iago. I warrant something from Venice,
  Othe. Excellent good: What Trumpet is that same?

Enter Lodouico, Desdemona, and Attendants.
You shall heare more by midnight.
   Iago. And for Cassio, let me be his vndertaker:

The Iustice of it pleases: very good
   Oth. Good, good:

Euen the bed she hath contaminated
   Iago. Do it not with poyson, strangle her in her bed,

my mind againe: this night Iago
expostulate with her: least her body and beautie vnprouide
   Othe. Get me some poyson, Iago, this night. Ile not

  Iago. That's fouler
   Oth. With mine Officer?

  Iago. Oh, 'tis foule in her
   Oth. I will chop her into Messes: Cuckold me?

no body
pattent to offend, for if it touch not you, it comes neere
   Iago. If you are so fond ouer her iniquitie: giue her

Iago
But yet the pitty of it, Iago: oh Iago, the pitty of it
   Othe. Nay that's certaine:

  Iago. I too gentle
And then of so gentle a condition?
   Othe. Oh, a thousand, a thousand times:

  Iago. She's the worse for all this
wit, and inuention?
sing the Sauagenesse out of a Beare: of so high and plenteous
with her Needle: an admirable Musitian. Oh she will
   Othe. Hang her, I do but say what she is: so delicate

   Iago. Nay, that's not your way

side, and command him Taskes
hath not a sweeter Creature: she might lye by an Emperours
stone: I strike it, and it hurts my hand. Oh, the world
night, for she shall not liue. No, my heart is turn'd to
   Othello. I, let her rot and perish, and be damn'd to

  Iago. Nay, you must forget that
A fine woman, a faire woman, a sweete woman?
   Oth. I would haue him nine yeeres a killing:

hath giu'n it his whore
the foolish woman your wife: she gaue it him and, he
  Iago. Yours by this hand: and to see how he prizes
  Oth. Was that mine?
   Iago. And did you see the Handkerchiefe?

  Oth. Oh, Iago
   Iago. Did you perceiue how he laugh'd at his vice?

   Oth. How shall I murther him, Iago

  Iago. Go too; say no more
   Cas. Prythee come: will you?

faine speake with you
   Iago. Well, I may chance to see you: for I would very

  Cassio. Yes, I intend so
   Iago. Will you sup there?

   Cas. I must, shee'l rayle in the streets else

  Iago. After her: after her

Exit

you will not come when you are next prepar'd for.
   Bian. If you'le come to supper to night you may, if

  Othe. By Heauen, that should be my Handkerchiefe
How now? How now?
   Cassio. How now, my sweete Bianca?

it, Ile take out no worke on't
There, giue it your Hobbey-horse, wheresoeuer you had
This is some Minxes token, & I must take out the worke?
finde it in your Chamber, and know not who left it there.
out the worke? A likely piece of worke, that you should
me euen now? I was a fine Foole to take it: I must take
did you meane by that same Handkerchiefe, you gaue
  Bian. Let the diuell, and his dam haunt you: what
What do you meane by this haunting of me?
  Cas. 'Tis such another Fitchew: marry a perfum'd one?

Enter Bianca.
   Iago. Before me: looke where she comes.

   Cassio. Well, I must leaue her companie

shall throw it to
oh, I see that nose of yours, but not that dogge, I
   Oth. Now he tells how she pluckt him to my Chamber:

So shakes, and pulls me. Ha, ha, ha
   Cassio. So hangs, and lolls, and weepes vpon me:

it
   Oth. Crying oh deere Cassio, as it were: his iesture imports

Bauble, and falls me thus about my neck
with certaine Venetians, and thither comes the
place. I was the other day talking on the Seabanke
   Cassio. She was heere euen now: she haunts me in euery

   Oth. Iago becomes me: now he begins the story

Out of her owne loue & flattery, not out of my promise
She is perswaded I will marry her
   Cas. This is the Monkeys owne giuing out:

   Oth. Haue you scoar'd me? Well

   Iago. I am a very Villaine else

   Cas. Prythee say true

   Iago. Why the cry goes, that you marry her

   Oth. So, so, so, so: they laugh, that winnes

So vnwholesome. Ha, ha, ha
Some Charitie to my wit, do not thinke it
  Cas. I marry. What? A customer; prythee beare
   Oth. Do ye triumph, Romaine? do you triumph?

  Cas. Ha, ha, ha
Do you intend it?
   Iago. She giues it out, that you shall marry her.

To tell it o're: go too, well said, well said
  Oth. Now he importunes him
   Iago. Do you heare Cassio?

   Oth. Now he denies it faintly: and laughes it out

   Cas. Alas poore Rogue, I thinke indeed she loues me

   Iago. I neuer knew woman loue man so

   Oth. Looke how he laughes already

  Cas. Alas poore Caitiffe
How quickely should you speed?
Now, if this Suit lay in Bianca's dowre,
   Iago. Ply Desdemona well, and you are sure on't:

Whose want euen killes me
  Cas. The worser, that you giue me the addition,
Quite in the wrong. How do you Lieutenant?
Poore Cassio's smiles, gestures, and light behauiours
And his vnbookish Ielousie must conserue
As he shall smile, Othello shall go mad:

Enter Cassio.
From the excesse of Laughter. Heere he comes.
He, when he heares of her, cannot restraine
To be-guile many, and be be-guil'd by one)
That dotes on Cassio, (as 'tis the Strumpets plague
Buyes her selfe Bread, and Cloath. It is a Creature
A Huswife that by selling her desires
Now will I question Cassio of Bianca,
But yet keepe time in all: will you withdraw?
   Iago. That's not amisse,

But (do'st thou heare) most bloody
I will be found most cunning in my Patience:
   Othe. Do'st thou heare, Iago,

And nothing of a man
Or I shall say y'are all in all in Spleene,
I say, but marke his gesture: marry Patience,
He hath, and is againe to cope your wife.
Where, how, how oft, how long ago, and when
For I will make him tell the Tale anew;
That dwell in euery Region of his face.
And marke the Fleeres, the Gybes, and notable Scornes
The which he promis'd. Do but encaue your selfe,
Bad him anon returne: and heere speake with me,
And layd good scuses vpon your Extasie,
Cassio came hither: I shifted him away,
(A passion most resulting such a man)
Whil'st you were heere, o're-whelmed with your griefe
Confine your selfe but in a patient List,
   Iago. Stand you a while apart,

   Oth. Oh, thou art wise: 'tis certaine

And knowing what I am, I know what she shallbe
And to suppose her chast. No, let me know,
To lip a wanton in a secure Cowch;
Oh, 'tis the spight of hell, the Fiends Arch-mock,
Which they dare sweare peculiar. Your case is better.
That nightly lye in those vnproper beds,
May draw with you. There's Millions now aliue,
Thinke euery bearded fellow that's but yoak'd
  Iago. Good Sir, be a man:
   Othe. Did he confesse it?

And many a ciuill Monster
   Iago. Ther's many a Beast then in a populous Citty,

   Othe. A Horned man's a Monster, and a Beast

Would you would beare your Fortune like a Man
  Iago. I mocke you not, by Heauen:
  Othe. Dost thou mocke me?
How is it Generall? Haue you not hurt your head?
I would on great occasion, speake with you.
He will recouer straight: when he is gone,
Do you withdraw your selfe a little while,
Breakes out to sauage madnesse. Looke, he stirres:
If not, he foames at mouth: and by and by
   Iago. The Lethargie must haue his quyet course:

   Cas. Rub him about the Temples

This is his second Fit: he had one yesterday
  Iago. My Lord is falne into an Epilepsie,
  Cas. What's the matter?
How now Cassio?

Enter Cassio.
My Lord, I say: Othello.
(All guiltlesse) meete reproach: what hoa? My Lord?
And many worthy, and chast Dames euen thus,
My Medicine workes. Thus credulous Fooles are caught,
  Iago. Worke on,

Falls in a Traunce.

O diuell.
Noses, Eares, and Lippes: is't possible. Confesse? Handkerchiefe?
Instruction. It is not words that shakes me thus, (pish)
inuest her selfe in such shadowing passion, without some
and then to confesse: I tremble at it. Nature would not
and be hang'd for his labour. First, to be hang'd,
Handkerchiefe: Confessions: Handkerchiefe. To confesse,
when they be-lye-her. Lye with her: that's fullsome:
   Othe. Lye with her? lye on her? We say lye on her,

  Iago. With her? On her: what you will
   Oth. With her?

  Iago. Lye
   Othe. What? What?

  Iago. Why, that he did: I know not what he did
   Oth. What hath he said?

No more then he'le vn-sweare
  Iago. He hath (my Lord) but be you well assur'd,
  Oth. Hath he said any thing?
But they must blab.)
Conuinced or supply'd them, cannot chuse
Or voluntary dotage of some Mistris,
Who hauing by their owne importunate suit,
Or heard him say (as Knaues be such abroad,
   Iag. What if I had said, I had seene him do you wrong?

  Othe. That's not so good now
   Iago . I: what of that?

Boading to all) he had my Handkerchiefe
As doth the Rauen o're the infectious house:
Thou saidst (oh, it comes ore my memorie,
   Othe. By heauen, I would most gladly haue forgot it:

But for the Handkerchiefe
They haue it very oft, that haue it not.
  Iago. Her honor is an Essence that's not seene,
May she giue that?
   Oth. She is Protectresse of her honor too:

She may (I thinke) bestow't on any man
  Iago. Why then 'tis hers (my Lord) and being hers,
   Oth. What then?

But if I giue my wife a Handkerchiefe
   Iago. If they do nothing, 'tis a Veniall slip:

The Diuell their vertue tempts, and they tempt Heauen
They that meane vertuously, and yet do so,
It is hypocrisie against the Diuell:
  Oth. Naked in bed (Iago) and not meane harme?
An houre, or more, not meaning any harme?
  Iago. Or to be naked with her Friend in bed,
  Oth. An vnauthoriz'd kisse?
  Iago. What, to kisse in priuate?
  Oth. Thinke so, Iago?
  Iago. Will you thinke so?

Enter Othello, and Iago.

Actus Quartus. Scena Prima.


Exeunt. omnes.

   Bian. 'Tis very good: I must be circumstanc'd.

For I attend heere: But Ile see you soone
  Cassio. 'Tis but a little way that I can bring you,
And say, if I shall see you soone at night?
I pray you bring me on the way a little,
   Bian. But that you do not loue me.

  Cassio. Not that I loue you not
   Bian. Why, I pray you?

To haue him see me woman'd
And thinke it no addition, nor my wish
  Cassio. I do attend heere on the Generall,
   Bian. Leaue you? Wherefore?

Take it, and doo't, and leaue me for this time
(As like enough it will) I would haue it coppied:
I like the worke well; Ere it be demanded
I found it in my Chamber,
  Cassio. I know not neither:
   Bian. Why, who's is it?

No, in good troth Bianca
That this is from some Mistris, some remembrance;
From whence you haue them. You are iealious now,
Throw your vilde gesses in the Diuels teeth,
   Cassio. Go too, woman:

Is't come to this? Well, well
To the felt-Absence: now I feele a Cause:
This is some Token from a newer Friend,
   Bianca. Oh Cassio, whence came this?

Take me this worke out
Strike off this score of absence. Sweet Bianca
But I shall in a more continuate time
I haue this while with leaden thoughts beene prest,
   Cassio. Pardon me, Bianca:

Oh weary reck'ning
More tedious then the Diall, eight score times?
Eight score eight houres? And Louers absent howres
What? keepe a weeke away? Seuen dayes, and Nights?
   Bian. And I was going to your Lodging, Cassio.

Indeed (sweet Loue) I was comming to your house
How is't with you, my most faire Bianca?
  Cassio. What make you from home?
  Bian. 'Saue you (Friend Cassio.)

Enter Bianca.
  Cas. I humbly thanke your Ladyship.

Exit

And seeke to effect it to my vttermost.
If I doe finde him fit, Ile moue your suite,
   Des. I will go seeke him. Cassio, walke heere about:

Aemil. Lady, Amen
   Des. Heauen keepe the Monster from Othello's mind.

Begot vpon it selfe, borne on it selfe
But iealious, for they're iealious. It is a Monster
They are not euer iealious for the cause,
Aemil. But Iealious soules will not be answer'd so;
   Des. Alas the day, I neuer gaue him cause.

Nor no Iealious Toy, concerning you
State matters, as you thinke, and no Conception,
Aemil. Pray heauen it bee
And he's Indited falsely.
But now I finde, I had suborn'd the Witnesse,
Arraigning his vnkindnesse with my soule:
I was (vnhandsome Warrior, as I am)
As fits the Bridall. Beshrew me much, aemilia,
Nor of them looke for such obseruancie
Of paine. Nay, we must thinke men are not Gods,
Our other healthfull members, euen to a sense
For let our finger ake, and it endues
Though great ones are their obiect. 'Tis euen so.
Mens Natures wrangle with inferiour things,
Hath pudled his cleare Spirit: and in such cases,
Made demonstrable heere in Cyprus, to him,
Either from Venice, or some vnhatch'd practise
  Des. I prythee do so. Something sure of State,

Exit

There's matter in't indeed, if he be angry.
Something of moment then: I will go meet him,
Puff't his owne Brother: And is he angry?
And like the Diuell from his very Arme
When it hath blowne his Rankes into the Ayre,
   Iago. Can he be angry? I haue seen the Cannon

And certainly in strange vnquietnesse
Aemil. He went hence but now:
   Iago. Is my Lord angry?

Then for my selfe, I dare. Let that suffice you
What I can do, I will: and more I will
For my free speech. You must awhile be patient:
And stood within the blanke of his displeasure
As I haue spoken for you all my best,
So helpe me euery spirit sanctified,
Were he in Fauour, as in Humour alter'd.
My Lord, is not my Lord; nor should I know him,
My Aduocation is not now in Tune;
   Des. Alas (thrice-gentle Cassio)

To Fortunes Almes
And shut my selfe vp in some other course
So shall I cloath me in a forc'd content,
But to know so, must be my benefit:
Can ransome me into his loue againe,
Nor purpos'd merit in futurity,
That nor my Seruice past, nor present Sorrowes,
If my offence, be of such mortall kinde,
Intirely honour, I would not be delayd.
Whom I, with all the Office of my heart
Exist, and be a member of his loue,
That by your vertuous meanes, I may againe
  Cassio. Madam, my former suite. I do beseech you,
you?
   Des. How now (good Cassio) what's the newes with

And loe the happinesse: go, and importune her
   Iago. There is no other way: 'tis she must doo't:

Looke you, Cassio and my Husband

Enter Iago, and Cassio.
They belch vs.
They eate vs hungerly, and when they are full
They are all but Stomackes, and we all but Food,
Aemil. 'Tis not a yeare or two shewes vs a man:
I am most vnhappy in the losse of it.
Sure, there's some wonder in this Handkerchiefe,
  Des. I neu'r saw this before.
Aemil. Is not this man iealious?

Exit Othello.

   Oth. Away.

   Des. Insooth, you are too blame

   Oth. The Handkerchiefe

Shar'd dangers with you
Hath founded his good Fortunes on your loue;
   Des. A man that all his time

   Oth. The Handkerchiefe

man
   Des. Come, come: you'l neuer meete a more sufficient

My minde mis-giues
   Oth. Fetch me the Handkerchiefe,

Pray you let Cassio be receiu'd againe
This is a tricke to put me from my suite,
   Des. Why so I can: but I will not now:

   Oth. Fetcht, let me see't

  Des. I say it is not lost
  Oth. How?
  Des. It is not lost: but what and if it were?
   Oth. Say you?

  Des. Blesse vs
  Oth. Is't lost? Is't gon? Speak, is't out o'th' way?
  Des. Why do you speake so startingly, and rash?
  Oth. Ha? wherefore?
   Des. Then would to Heauen, that I had neuer seene't?

  Oth. Most veritable, therefore looke too't well
   Des. Indeed? Is't true?

Conseru'd of Maidens hearts
And it was dyde in Mummey, which the Skilfull
The Wormes were hallowed, that did breede the Silke,
In her Prophetticke furie sow'd the Worke:
The Sun to course, two hundred compasses,
A Sybill that had numbred in the world
  Oth. 'Tis true: There's Magicke in the web of it:
   Des. Is't possible?

As nothing else could match
To loose't, or giue't away, were such perdition,
Make it a Darling, like your precious eye:
To giue it her. I did so; and take heede on't,
And bid me (when my Fate would haue me Wiu'd)
After new Fancies. She dying, gaue it me,
Should hold her loathed, and his Spirits should hunt
Or made a Guift of it, my Fathers eye
Intirely to her loue: But if she lost it,
'T would make her Amiable, and subdue my Father
The thoughts of people. She told her, while she kept it,
She was a Charmer, and could almost read
Did an aegyptian to my Mother giue:
   Oth. That's a fault: That Handkerchiefe

  Des. No indeed, my Lord
   Oth. Not?

   Des. I haue it not about me

   Oth. That which I gaue you

   Des. Heere my Lord

Lend me thy Handkerchiefe
   Oth. I haue a salt and sorry Rhewme offends me:

  Des. I haue sent to bid Cassio come speake with you
   Oth. What promise, Chucke?

Come, now your promise
   Des. I cannot speake of this:

But our new Heraldry is hands, not hearts
   Oth. A liberall hand. The hearts of old, gaue hands:

For 'twas that hand that gaue away my heart
   Des. You may (indeed) say so:

A franke one
That commonly rebels: 'Tis a good hand,
For heere's a yong, and sweating Diuell heere
Much Castigation, Exercise deuout,
A sequester from Liberty: Fasting, and Prayer,
Hot, hot, and moyst. This hand of yours requires
   Oth. This argues fruitfulnesse, and liberall heart:

   Des. It hath felt no age, nor knowne no sorrow

This hand is moist, my Lady
   Oth. Giue me your hand.

  Des. Well, my good Lord
How do you, Desdemona?
  Oth. Well my good Lady. Oh hardnes to dissemble!
Call'd to him. How is't with you, my Lord?
  Des. I will not leaue him now, till Cassio be

Enter Othello.
Aemil. Looke where he comes.
Drew all such humors from him.
  Des. Who, he? I thinke the Sun where he was borne,
Aemil. Is he not iealious?
To put him to ill-thinking.
As iealious Creatures are, it were enough
Is true of minde, and made of no such basenesse,
Full of Cruzadoes. And but my Noble Moore
   Des. Beleeue me, I had rather haue lost my purse

Aemil. I know not Madam
  Des. Where should I loose the Handkerchiefe, aemilia?

Exit Clo.

and therefore I will attempt the doing it.
   Clo. To do this, is within the compasse of mans Wit,

be well
haue moou'd my Lord on his behalfe, and hope all will
   Des. Seeke him, bidde him come hither: tell him, I

Questions, and by them answer
  Clo. I will Catechize the world for him, that is, make
   Des. Can you enquire him out? and be edified by report?

to lye in mine owne throat
a lodging, and say he lies heere, or he lies there, were
  Clo. I know not where he lodges, and for mee to deuise
   Des. Can any thing be made of this?

I lye
  Clo. To tell you where he lodges, is to tel you where
   Des. Go too: where lodges he?

'tis stabbing
  Clo. He's a Soldier, and for me to say a Souldier lyes,
   Des. Why man?

  Clow. I dare not say he lies any where
lyes?
  Des. Do you know Sirrah, where Lieutenant Cassio

Enter Desdemona, aemilia, and Clown.

Scaena Quarta.


Exeunt.

   Iago. I am your owne for euer.

Now art thou my Lieutenant
For the faire Diuell.
To furnish me with some swift meanes of death
Come go with me a-part, I will withdraw
O damne her, damne her.
   Oth. Damne her lewde Minx:

But let her liue
'Tis done at your Request.
   Iago. My Friend is dead:

That Cassio's not aliue
Within these three dayes let me heare thee say,
And will vpon the instant put thee too't.
Not with vaine thanks, but with acceptance bounteous,
   Oth. I greet thy loue,

What bloody businesse euer
And to obey shall be in me remorse,
To wrong'd Othello's Seruice. Let him command,
The execution of his wit, hands, heart,
Witnesse that heere Iago doth giue vp
You Elements, that clip vs round about,
Witnesse you euer-burning Lights aboue,
   Iago. Do not rise yet:

I heere engage my words
In the due reuerence of a Sacred vow,
Swallow them vp. Now by yond Marble Heauen,
Till that a capeable, and wide Reuenge
Shall neu'r looke backe, neu'r ebbe to humble Loue,
Euen so my bloody thoughts, with violent pace
To the Proponticke, and the Hellespont:
Neu'r keepes retyring ebbe, but keepes due on
Whose Icie Current, and compulsiue course,
   Oth. Neuer Iago. Like to the Ponticke Sea,

   Iago. Patience I say: your minde may change

   Oth. Oh blood, blood, blood

   Iago. Yet be content

For 'tis of Aspickes tongues
To tyrannous Hate. Swell bosome with thy fraught,
Yeeld vp (O Loue) thy Crowne, and hearted Throne
Arise blacke vengeance, from the hollow hell,
All my fond loue thus do I blow to Heauen. 'Tis gone.
Now do I see 'tis true. Looke heere Iago,
One is too poore, too weake for my reuenge.
   Othel. O that the Slaue had forty thousand liues:

It speakes against her with the other proofes
   Iago. If it be that, or any, it was here.

   Oth. If it be that

See Cassio wipe his Beard with
(I am sure it was your wiues) did I to day
   Iago. I know not that: but such a Handkerchiefe

  Oth. I gaue her such a one: 'twas my first gift
Spotted with Strawberries, in your wiues hand?
Haue you not sometimes seene a Handkerchiefe
She may be honest yet: Tell me but this,
   Iago. Nay yet be wise; yet we see nothing done,

   Oth. Ile teare her all to peeces

That do demonstrate thinly
   Iago. And this may helpe to thicken other proofes,

'Tis a shrew'd doubt, though it be but a Dreame
   Oth. But this denoted a fore-gone conclusion,

  Iago. Nay, this was but his Dreame
   Oth. O monstrous! monstrous!

That gaue thee to the Moore
And sigh, and kisse, and then cry cursed Fate,
That grew vpon my lippes, laid his Leg ore my Thigh,
As if he pluckt vp kisses by the rootes,
Cry, oh sweet Creature: then kisse me hard,
And then (Sir) would he gripe, and wring my hand:
Let vs be wary, let vs hide our Loues,
In sleepe I heard him say, sweet Desdemona,
Their Affayres: one of this kinde is Cassio:
So loose of Soule, that in their sleepes will mutter
I could not sleepe. There are a kinde of men,
And being troubled with a raging tooth,
I will go on. I lay with Cassio lately,
(Prick'd too't by foolish Honesty, and Loue)
But sith I am entred in this cause so farre
   Iago. I do not like the Office.

   Oth. Giue me a liuing reason she's disloyall

Will giue you satisfaction, you might haue't
Which leade directly to the doore of Truth,
If imputation, and strong circumstances,
As Ignorance, made drunke. But yet, I say,
As salt as Wolues in pride, and Fooles as grosse
Were they as prime as Goates, as hot as Monkeyes,
It is impossible you should see this,
What shall I say? Where's Satisfaction?
More then their owne. What then? How then?
If euer mortall eyes do see them boulster
To bring them to that Prospect: Damne them then,
  Iago. It were a tedious difficulty, I thinke,
  Oth. Death, and damnation. Oh!
Behold her top'd?
Would you the super-vision grossely gape on?
   Iago. And may: but how? How satisfied, my Lord?

  Oth. Would? Nay, and I will
You would be satisfied?
I do repent me, that I put it to you.
   Iago. I see you are eaten vp with Passion:

Ile not indure it. Would I were satisfied
Poyson, or Fire, or suffocating streames,
As mine owne face. If there be Cords, or Kniues,
As Dians Visage, is now begrim'd and blacke
Ile haue some proofe. My name that was as fresh
I thinke that thou art iust, and thinke thou art not:
I thinke my Wife be honest, and thinke she is not:
   Oth. By the World,

And looses that it workes for
   Iago. I should be wise; for Honestie's a Foole,

   Oth. Nay stay: thou should'st be honest

Ile loue no Friend, sith Loue breeds such offence
I thanke you for this profit, and from hence
To be direct and honest, is not safe.
Oh monstrous world! Take note, take note (O World)
That lou'st to make thine Honesty, a Vice!
God buy you: take mine Office. Oh wretched Foole,
Are you a Man? Haue you a Soule? or Sense?
   Iago. O Grace! O Heauen forgiue me!

Greater then that
For nothing canst thou to damnation adde,
Do deeds to make Heauen weepe, all Earth amaz'd;
On Horrors head, Horrors accumulate:
Neuer pray more: Abandon all remorse
   Oth. If thou dost slander her, and torture me,

   Iago. My Noble Lord

To hang a doubt on: Or woe vpon thy life
That the probation beare no Hindge, nor Loope,
  Oth. Make me to see't: or (at the least) so proue it,
   Iago. Is't come to this?

Then answer my wak'd wrath
Thou had'st bin better haue bin borne a Dog
Or by the worth of mine eternall Soule,
Be sure of it: Giue me the Occular proofe,
  Oth. Villaine, be sure thou proue my Loue a Whore;
   Iago. Is't possible my Lord?

Farewell: Othello's Occupation's gone
Th' immortall Ioues dread Clamours, counterfet,
And O you mortall Engines, whose rude throates
Pride, Pompe, and Circumstance of glorious Warre:
The Royall Banner, and all Qualitie,
The Spirit-stirring Drum, th' Eare-piercing Fife,
Farewell the neighing Steed, and the shrill Trumpe,
That makes Ambition, Vertue! Oh farewell,
Farewell the plumed Troopes, and the bigge Warres,
Farewell the Tranquill minde; farewell Content;
So I had nothing knowne. Oh now, for euer
Pyoners and all, had tasted her sweet Body,
  Oth. I had beene happy, if the generall Campe,
   Iago. I am sorry to heare this?

Let him not know't, and he's not robb'd at all
He that is robb'd, not wanting what is stolne,
I found not Cassio's kisses on her Lippes:
I slept the next night well, fed well, was free, and merrie.
I saw't not, thought it not: it harm'd not me:
  Oth. What sense had I, in her stolne houres of Lust?
   Iago. How now, my Lord?

Then but to know't a little
I sweare 'tis better to be much abus'd,
   Oth. Auant, be gone: Thou hast set me on the Racke:

  Iago. Why how now Generall? No more of that
   Oth. Ha, ha, false to mee?

Which thou owd'st yesterday
Shall euer medicine thee to that sweete sleepe
Nor all the drowsie Syrrups of the world
Looke where he comes: Not Poppy, nor Mandragora,

Enter Othello.
Burne like the Mines of Sulphure. I did say so.
But with a little acte vpon the blood,
Which at the first are scarse found to distaste:
Dangerous conceites, are in their Natures poysons,
The Moore already changes with my poyson:
As proofes of holy Writ. This may do something.
Are to the iealious, confirmations strong,
And let him finde it. Trifles light as ayre,
I will in Cassio's Lodging loose this Napkin,

Exit aemil.

I haue vse for it. Go, leaue me.
   Iago. Be not acknowne on't:

When she shall lacke it
Giu't me againe. Poore Lady, shee'l run mad
Aemil. If it be not for some purpose of import,
  Iago. Why, what is that to you?
so earnest to haue me filch it?
Aemil. What will you do with't, that you haue bene
   Iago. A good wench, giue it me.

Looke, heere 'tis
And to th' aduantage, I being heere, took't vp:
Aemil. No: but she let it drop by negligence,
   Iago. Hast stolne it from her?

That which so often you did bid me steale
Why that the Moore first gaue to Desdemona,
Aemil. What Handkerchiefe?
   Iago. What Handkerchiefe?

For that same Handkerchiefe
Aemil. Oh, is that all? What will you giue me now
  Iago. To haue a foolish wife.
Aemil. Hah?
It is a common thing-
   Iago. You haue a thing for me?

Aemil. Do not you chide: I haue a thing for you
  Iago. How now? What do you heere alone?

Enter Iago.
I nothing, but to please his Fantasie.
Heauen knowes, not I:
And giu't Iago: what he will do with it
To kisse, and talke too. Ile haue the worke tane out,
That she reserues it euermore about her,
(For he coniur'd her, she should euer keepe it)
Woo'd me to steale it. But she so loues the Token,
My wayward Husband hath a hundred times
This was her first remembrance from the Moore,
Aemil. I am glad I haue found this Napkin:
  Des. I am very sorry that you are not well.

Enter.
Let it alone: Come, Ile go in with you.
   Oth. Your Napkin is too little:

It will be well
Let me but binde it hard, within this houre
   Des. Why that's with watching, 'twill away againe.

  Oth. I haue a paine vpon my Forehead, heere
Are you not well?
   Des. Why do you speake so faintly?

   Oth. I am too blame

By you inuited, do attend your presence
Your dinner, and the generous Islanders
   Des. How now, my deere Othello?

Ile not beleeue't
If she be false, Heauen mock'd it selfe:

Enter Desdemona and aemilia.
When we do quicken. Looke where she comes:
Euen then, this forked plague is Fated to vs,
'Tis destiny vnshunnable, like death:
Prerogatiu'd are they lesse then the Base,
For others vses. Yet 'tis the plague to Great-ones,
Then keepe a corner in the thing I loue
And liue vpon the vapour of a Dungeon,
And not their Appetites? I had rather be a Toad,
That we can call these delicate Creatures ours,
Must be to loath her. Oh Curse of Marriage!
Shee's gone. I am abus'd, and my releefe
Into the vale of yeares (yet that's not much)
That Chamberers haue: Or for I am declin'd
And haue not those soft parts of Conuersation
To prey at Fortune. Haply, for I am blacke,
I'ld whistle her off, and let her downe the winde
Though that her Iesses were my deere heart-strings,
Of humane dealings. If I do proue her Haggard,
And knowes all Quantities with a learn'd Spirit
  Oth. This Fellow's of exceeding honesty,

Enter.
   Iago. I once more take my leaue.

   Oth. Feare not my gouernment

And hold her free, I do beseech your Honor
(As worthy cause I haue to feare I am)
Let me be thought too busie in my feares,
Much will be seene in that: In the meane time,
With any strong, or vehement importunitie,
Note if your Lady straine his Entertainment
You shall by that perceiue him, and his meanes:
Yet if you please, to him off a-while:
For sure he filles it vp with great Ability;
Although 'tis fit that Cassio haue his Place;
To scan this thing no farther: Leaue it to time,
   Iago. My Lord, I would I might intreat your Honor

Sees, and knowes more, much more then he vnfolds
This honest Creature (doubtlesse)
   Othel. Why did I marry?

   Iago. My Lord, I take my leaue

Leaue me Iago
Set on thy wife to obserue.
If more thou dost perceiue, let me know more:
   Oth. Farewell, farewell:

And happily repent
May fal to match you with her Country formes,
Her will, recoyling to her better iudgement,
Distinctly speake of her, though I may feare
But (pardon me) I do not in position
Foule disproportions, Thoughts vnnaturall.
Foh, one may smel in such, a will most ranke,
Whereto we see in all things, Nature tends:
Of her owne Clime, Complexion, and Degree,
Not to affect many proposed Matches
As (to be bold with you)
   Iago. I, there's the point:

   Oth. And yet how Nature erring from it selfe

And long liue you to thinke so
   Iago. Long liue she so;

I do not thinke but Desdemona's honest
   Oth. No, not much mou'd:

My Lord, I see y'are mou'd
Cassio's my worthy Friend:
Which my Thoughts aym'd not.
My speech should fall into such vilde successe,
   Iago. Should you do so (my Lord)

   Oth. I will not

Then to Suspition
To grosser issues, nor to larger reach,
I am to pray you, not to straine my speech
But I do see y'are moou'd:
Comes from your Loue.
I hope you will consider what is spoke
   Iago. Trust me, I feare it has:

  Oth. Not a iot, not a iot
   Iago. I see this hath a little dash'd your Spirits:

   Oth. I am bound to thee for euer

For too much louing you
I humbly do beseech you of your pardon
But I am much too blame:
He thought 'twas Witchcraft.
To seele her Fathers eyes vp, close as Oake,
Shee that so young could giue out such a Seeming
   Iago. Why go too then:

   Oth. And so she did

She lou'd them most
And when she seem'd to shake, and feare your lookes,
  Iago. She did deceiue her Father, marrying you,
   Oth. Dost thou say so?

Is not to leaue't vndone, but kept vnknowne
Their best Conscience,
They dare not shew their Husbands.
In Venice, they do let Heauen see the prankes
I know our Country disposition well:
Out of selfe-Bounty, be abus'd: Looke too't:
I would not haue your free, and Noble Nature,
Weare your eyes, thus: not Iealious, nor Secure:
Looke to your wife, obserue her well with Cassio,
Receiue it from me. I speake not yet of proofe:
With franker spirit. Therefore (as I am bound)
To shew the Loue and Duty that I beare you
   Ia. I am glad of this: For now I shall haue reason

Away at once with Loue, or Iealousie
And on the proofe, there is no more but this,
Ile see before I doubt; when I doubt, proue;
For she had eyes, and chose me. No Iago,
The smallest feare, or doubt of her reuolt,
Nor from mine owne weake merites, will I draw
Where Vertue is, these are more vertuous.
Is free of Speech, Sings, Playes, and Dances:
To say my wife is faire, feeds well, loues company,
Matching thy inference. 'Tis not to make me Iealious,
To such exufflicate, and blow'd Surmises,
When I shall turne the businesse of my Soule
Is to be resolu'd: Exchange me for a Goat,
With fresh suspitions? No: to be once in doubt,
To follow still the changes of the Moone
Think'st thou, I'ld make a Life of Iealousie;
   Oth. Why? why is this?

From Iealousie
Good Heauen, the Soules of all my Tribe defend
To him that euer feares he shall be poore:
But Riches finelesse, is as poore as Winter,
   Iago. Poore, and Content, is rich, and rich enough,

  Oth. O miserie
Who dotes, yet doubts: Suspects, yet soundly loues?
But oh, what damned minutes tels he ore,
Who certaine of his Fate, loues not his wronger:
The meate it feeds on. That Cuckold liues in blisse,
It is the greene-ey'd Monster, which doth mocke
  Iago. Oh, beware my Lord, of iealousie,
   Oth. Ha?

Nor shall not, whil'st 'tis in my custodie
   Iago. You cannot, if my heart were in your hand,

   Oth. Ile know thy Thoughts

And makes me poore indeed
Robs me of that, which not enriches him,
But he that filches from me my good Name,
'Twas mine, 'tis his, and has bin slaue to thousands:
'Tis something, nothing;
Who steales my purse, steales trash:
Is the immediate Iewell of their Soules;
  Iago. Good name in Man, & woman (deere my Lord)
   Oth. What dost thou meane?

To let you know my thoughts
Nor for my Manhood, Honesty, and Wisedome,
It were not for your quiet, nor your good,
Out of his scattering, and vnsure obseruance:
Would take no notice, nor build your selfe a trouble
From one, that so imperfectly conceits,
Shapes faults that are not) that your wisedome
To spy into Abuses, and of my iealousie
(As I confesse it is my Natures plague
Though I perchance am vicious in my guesse
   Iago. I do beseech you,

A stranger to thy Thoughts
If thou but think'st him wrong'd, and mak'st his eare
  Oth. Thou do'st conspire against thy Friend (Iago)
With meditations lawfull?
Keepe Leetes, and Law-dayes, and in Sessions sit
Wherein vncleanly Apprehensions
Sometimes intrude not? Who ha's that breast so pure,
As where's that Palace, whereinto foule things
Vtter my Thoughts? Why say, they are vild, and falce?
I am not bound to that: All Slaues are free:
Though I am bound to euery Acte of dutie,
   Iago. Good my Lord pardon me,

The worst of words
As thou dost ruminate, and giue thy worst of thoughts
I prythee speake to me, as to thy thinkings,
   Oth. Nay, yet there's more in this?

   Iago. Why then I thinke Cassio's an honest man

   Oth. Certaine, men should be what they seeme

Or those that be not, would they might seeme none
   Iago. Men should be what they seeme,

   Oth. I thinke so too

I dare be sworne, I thinke that he is honest
   Iago. For Michael Cassio,

That Passion cannot rule
They're close dilations, working from the heart,
Are trickes of Custome: but in a man that's iust,
For such things in a false disloyall Knaue
Therefore these stops of thine, fright me the more:
And weigh'st thy words before thou giu'st them breath,
And for I know thou'rt full of Loue, and Honestie,
   Oth. I thinke thou do'st:

   Iago. My Lord, you know I loue you

Shew me thy thought
Some horrible Conceite. If thou do'st loue me,
As if thou then hadd'st shut vp in thy Braine
And didd'st contract, and purse thy brow together,
Of my whole course of wooing; thou cried'st, Indeede?
And when I told thee, he was of my Counsaile,
When Cassio left my wife. What didd'st not like?
I heard thee say euen now, thou lik'st not that,
Too hideous to be shewne. Thou dost mean somthing:
As if there were some Monster in thy thought
  Oth. Thinke, my Lord? Alas, thou ecchos't me;
  Iago. Thinke, my Lord?
   Oth. What do'st thou thinke?

   Iago. My Lord, for ought I know

  Oth. Honest? I, Honest
  Iago. Honest, my Lord?
Is he not honest?
  Oth. Indeed? I indeed. Discern'st thou ought in that?
   Iago. Indeed?

   Oth. O yes, and went betweene vs very oft

  Iago. I did not thinke he had bin acquainted with hir
   Oth. Why of thy thought, Iago?

No further harme
  Iago. But for a satisfaction of my Thought,
Why dost thou aske?
  Oth. He did, from first to last:
When he woo'd my Lady, know of your loue?
  Iago. Did Michael Cassio
   Oth. What dost thou say, Iago?

   Iago. My Noble Lord

Chaos is come againe
But I do loue thee: and when I loue thee not,
  Oth. Excellent wretch: Perdition catch my Soule

Enter.
What ere you be, I am obedient.
   Des. aemilia come; be as your Fancies teach you:

   Oth. Farewell my Desdemona, Ile come to thee strait

   Des. Shall I deny you? No: farewell my Lord

To leaue me but a little to my selfe
Whereon, I do beseech thee, grant me this,
   Oth. I will deny thee nothing.

And fearefull to be granted
It shall be full of poize, and difficult waight,
Wherein I meane to touch your Loue indeed,
To your owne person. Nay, when I haue a suite
Or sue to you, to do a peculiar profit
Or feede on nourishing dishes, or keepe you warme,
'Tis as I should entreate you weare your Gloues,
   Des. Why, this is not a Boone:

I will deny thee nothing
   Oth. Prythee no more: Let him come when he will:

To bring him in? Trust me, I could do much
Hath tane your part, to haue so much to do
(When I haue spoke of you dispraisingly)
That came a woing with you? and so many a time
Or stand so mam'ring on? What? Michael Cassio,
What you would aske me, that I should deny,
Tell me Othello. I wonder in my Soule
T' encurre a priuate checke. When shall he come?
Out of her best, is not almost a fault
(Saue that they say the warres must make example)
And yet his Trespasse, in our common reason
Exceed three dayes. Infaith hee's penitent:
I prythee name the time, but let it not
On Tuesday noone, or night; on Wensday Morne.
   Des. Why then to morrow night, on Tuesday morne,

I meete the Captaines at the Cittadell
  Oth. I shall not dine at home:
   Des. To morrow Dinner then?

  Oth. No, not to night
   Des. Shall't be to night, at Supper?

  Oth. The sooner (Sweet) for you
   Des. But shall't be shortly?

   Othel. Not now (sweet Desdemon) some other time

To suffer with him. Good Loue, call him backe
That he hath left part of his greefe with mee
  Des. I sooth; so humbled,
   Oth. Went he hence now?

I prythee call him backe
I haue no iudgement in an honest face.
That erres in Ignorance, and not in Cunning,
For if he be not one, that truly loues you,
His present reconciliation take.
If I haue any grace, or power to moue you,
  Des. Why your Lieutenant Cassio: Good my Lord,
   Oth. Who is't you meane?

A man that languishes in your displeasure
I haue bin talking with a Suitor heere,
   Des. How now my Lord?

   Oth. I do beleeue 'twas he

Seeing your comming
That he would steale away so guilty-like,
  Iago. Cassio my Lord? No sure, I cannot thinke it
   Othel. Was not that Cassio parted from my wife?

  Iago. Nothing my Lord; or if- I know not what
   Othel. What dost thou say?

  Iago. Hah? I like not that

Exit Cassio.

   Des. Well, do your discretion.

Vnfit for mine owne purposes
   Cassio. Madam, not now: I am very ill at ease,

   Des. Why stay, and heare me speake

   Cassio. Madam, Ile take my leaue

Aemil. Madam, heere comes my Lord

Enter Othello, and Iago.
Then giue thy cause away.
For thy Solicitor shall rather dye,
With Cassio's suite: Therefore be merry Cassio,
Ile intermingle euery thing he do's
His Bed shall seeme a Schoole, his Boord a Shrift,
Ile watch him tame, and talke him out of patience;
To the last Article. My Lord shall neuer rest,
If I do vow a friendship, Ile performe it
I giue thee warrant of thy place. Assure thee,
   Des. Do not doubt that: before aemilia here,

My Generall will forget my Loue, and Seruice
That I being absent, and my place supply'd,
Or breede it selfe so out of Circumstances,
Or feede vpon such nice and waterish diet,
That policie may either last so long,
   Cassio. I, but Lady,

Then in a politique distance
He shall in strangenesse stand no farther off,
You haue knowne him long, and be you well assur'd
   Des. I know't: I thanke you: you do loue my Lord:

He's neuer any thing but your true Seruant
What euer shall become of Michael Cassio,
   Cassio. Bounteous Madam,

As friendly as you were
But I will haue my Lord, and you againe
   Des. Oh that's an honest Fellow, Do not doubt Cassio

As if the cause were his
I warrant it greeues my Husband,
Aemil. Good Madam do:
All my abilities in thy behalfe.
  Des. Be thou assur'd (good Cassio) I will do

Enter Desdemona, Cassio, and aemilia.

Scoena Tertia.

Exeunt.

  Gent. Well waite vpon your Lordship.
   Oth. This Fortification (Gentlemen) shall we see't?

   Iago. Well, my good Lord, Ile doo't

Repaire there to mee
That done, I will be walking on the Workes,
And by him do my duties to the Senate:
  Othe. These Letters giue (Iago) to the Pylot,

Enter Othello, Iago, and Gentlemen.

Scoena Secunda.

   Cassio. I am much bound to you.

To speake your bosome freely
I will bestow you where you shall haue time
Aemil. Pray you come in:
With Desdemon alone.
Giue me aduantage of some breefe Discourse
If you thinke fit, or that it may be done,
   Cassio. Yet I beseech you,

To bring you in againe
And needs no other Suitor, but his likings
He might not but refuse you. But he protests he loues you
And great Affinitie: and that in wholsome Wisedome
That he you hurt is of great Fame in Cyprus,
And she speakes for you stoutly. The Moore replies,
The Generall and his wife are talking of it,
For your displeasure: but all will sure be well.
Aemil. Goodmorrow (good Lieutenant) I am sorrie

Enter aemilia.
A Florentine more kinde, and honest.
  Cassio. I humbly thanke you for't. I neuer knew

Exit

May be more free.
Out of the way, that your conuerse and businesse
And Ile deuise a meane to draw the Moore
   Iago. Ile send her to you presently:

Procure me some accesse
My suite to her is, that she will to vertuous Desdemona
I haue made bold (Iago) to send in to your wife:
  Cassio. Why no: the day had broke before we parted.
   Iago. You haue not bin a-bed then?

In happy time, Iago

Enter Iago.

Exit Clo.

seeme to notifie vnto her.
  Clo. She is stirring sir: if she will stirre hither, I shall
her a little fauour of Speech. Wilt thou do this?
the Generall be stirring, tell her, there's one Cassio entreats
peece of Gold for thee: if the Gentlewoman that attends
   Cassio. Prythee keepe vp thy Quillets, ther's a poore

I heare you
  Clo. No, I heare not your honest Friend:
  Cassio. Dost thou heare me, mine honest Friend?

Exit Mu.

away. Go, vanish into ayre, away.
   Clow. Then put vp your Pipes in your bagge, for Ile

   Mus. We haue none such, sir

do's not greatly care
too't againe. But (as they say) to heare Musicke, the Generall
   Clo. If you haue any Musicke that may not be heard,

   Mus. Well Sir, we will not

sake to make no more noise with it
so likes your Musick, that he desires you for loues
know. But Masters, heere's money for you: and the Generall
  Clow. Marry sir, by many a winde Instrument that I
   Mus. Whereby hangs a tale, sir?

   Clo. Oh, thereby hangs a tale

  Mus. I marry are they sir
  Clo. Are these I pray you, winde Instruments?
  Mus. How Sir? how?
that they speake i'th' Nose thus?
   Clo. Why Masters, haue your Instruments bin in Naples,

Something that's briefe: and bid, goodmorrow General
  Cassio. Masters, play heere, I wil content your paines,

Enter Cassio, Musitians, and Clowne.

Actus Tertius. Scena Prima.


Enter.
Dull not Deuice, by coldnesse, and delay.
Soliciting his wife: I, that's the way:
And bring him iumpe, when he may Cassio finde
Ile set her on my selfe, a while, to draw the Moor apart,
My Wife must moue for Cassio to her Mistris:
Two things are to be done:

Exit Roderigo.

Nay get thee gone.
Away, I say, thou shalt know more heereafter:
Retire thee, go where thou art Billited:
Pleasure, and Action, make the houres seeme short.
Content thy selfe, a-while. Introth 'tis Morning;
Yet Fruites that blossome first, will first be ripe:
Though other things grow faire against the Sun,
And thou by that small hurt hath casheer'd Cassio:
Dos't not go well? Cassio hath beaten thee,
And Wit depends on dilatory time:
Thou know'st we worke by Wit, and not by Witchcraft
What wound did euer heale but by degrees?
   Iago. How poore are they that haue not Patience?

againe to Venice
And so, with no money at all, and a little more Wit, returne
will bee, I shall haue so much experience for my paines;
exceedingly well Cudgell'd: And I thinke the issue
Crie. My Money is almost spent; I haue bin to night
like a Hound that hunts, but one that filles vp the
  Rodorigo. I do follow heere in the Chace, not

Enter Rodorigo.
How now Rodorigo?
That shall en-mash them all.
And out of her owne goodnesse make the Net,
So will I turne her vertue into pitch.
She shall vndo her Credite with the Moore.
And by how much she striues to do him good,
That she repeales him, for her bodies Lust,
Ile powre this pestilence into his eare:
And she for him, pleades strongly to the Moore,
Plies Desdemona, to repaire his Fortune,
As I do now. For whiles this honest Foole
They do suggest at first with heauenly shewes,
When diuels will the blackest sinnes put on,
Directly to his good? Diuinitie of hell,
To Counsell Cassio to this paralell course,
With his weake Function. How am I then a Villaine,
Euen as her Appetite shall play the God,
That she may make, vnmake, do what she list,
His Soule is so enfetter'd to her Loue,
All Seales, and Simbols of redeemed sin:
To win the Moore, were to renownce his Baptisme,
As the free Elements. And then for her
In any honest Suite. She's fram'd as fruitefull
Th' inclyning Desdemona to subdue
For 'tis most easie
To win the Moore againe.
Proball to thinking, and indeed the course
When this aduise is free I giue, and honest,
That saies I play the Villaine?
  Iago. And what's he then,

Exit Cassio.

   Cassio. Good night, honest Iago.

must to the Watch
   Iago. You are in the right: good night Lieutenant, I

for me: I am desperate of my Fortunes if they check me
I will beseech the vertuous Desdemona to vndertake
   Cassio. I thinke it freely: and betimes in the morning,

kindnesse
   Iago. I protest in the sinceritie of Loue, and honest

   Cassio. You aduise me well

your Loue, shall grow stronger, then it was before
Fortunes against any lay worth naming, this cracke of
you, and her husband, entreat her to splinter. And my
then she is requested. This broken ioynt betweene
she holds it a vice in her goodnesse, not to do more
of so free, so kinde, so apt, so blessed a disposition,
her helpe to put you in your place againe. She is
and Graces. Confesse your selfe freely to her: Importune
Contemplation, marke: and deuotement of her parts
for that he hath deuoted, and giuen vp himselfe to the
Wife, is now the Generall. I may say so, in this respect,
time man. I tell you what you shall do: Our General's
  Iago. You, or any man liuing, may be drunke at a
   Cassio. I haue well approued it, Sir. I drunke?

you
And good Lieutenant, I thinke, you thinke I loue
Creature, if it be well vs'd: exclaime no more against it.
   Iago. Come, come: good wine, is a good familiar

is a diuell
strange! Euery inordinate cup is vnbless'd, and the Ingredient
man, by and by a Foole, and presently a Beast. Oh
such an answer would stop them all. To be now a sensible
me, I am a drunkard: had I as many mouthes as Hydra,
   Cas. I will aske him for my Place againe, he shall tell

it is, mend it for your owne good
I could hartily wish this had not befalne: but since it is, as
Time, the Place, & the Condition of this Country stands
   Iago. Come, you are too seuere a Moraller. As the

another to make me frankly despise my selfe
place to the diuell wrath, one vnperfectnesse, shewes me
  Cas. It hath pleas'd the diuell drunkennesse, to giue
came you thus recouered?
   Iago. Why? But you are now well enough: how

reuell and applause, transforme our selues into Beasts
their Braines? that we should with ioy, pleasance,
men should put an Enemie in their mouthes, to steale away
a Quarrell, but nothing wherefore. Oh, that
  Cas. I remember a masse of things, but nothing distinctly:
   Iago. Is't possible?

  Cas. I know not
Sword? What had he done to you?
   Iago. What was he that you follow'd with your

thee Diuell
Wine, if thou hast no name to be knowne by, let vs call
with ones owne shadow? Oh thou invisible spirit of
squabble? Swagger? Sweare? And discourse Fustian
indiscreet an Officer. Drunke? And speake Parrat? And
so good a Commander, with so slight, so drunken, and so
   Cas. I will rather sue to be despis'd, then to deceiue

him againe, and he's yours
dogge, to affright an Imperious Lyon. Sue to
then in malice) euen so as one would beate his offencelesse
but now cast in his moode, (a punishment more in policie,
more wayes to recouer the Generall againe. You are
repute your selfe such a looser. What man, there are
You haue lost no Reputation at all, vnlesse you
imposition; oft got without merit, and lost without deseruing.
then in Reputation. Reputation is an idle, and most false
receiued some bodily wound; there is more sence in that
   Iago. As I am an honest man I had thought you had

Iago, my Reputation
myselfe, and what remaines is bestiall. My Reputation,
lost my Reputation. I haue lost the immortall part of
   Cas. Reputation, Reputation, Reputation: Oh I haue

   Iago. Marry Heauen forbid

  Cas. I, past all Surgery
  Iago. What are you hurt Lieutenant?

Enter.
To haue their Balmy slumbers wak'd with strife.
Come Desdemona, 'tis the Soldiers life,
And silence those whom this vil'd brawle distracted.
Iago, looke with care about the Towne,
My selfe will be your Surgeon. Lead him off:
Come away to bed. Sir for your hurts,
  Othe. All's well, Sweeting:
   Des. What is the matter (Deere?)

Ile make thee an example
Looke if my gentle Loue be not rais'd vp:

Enter Desdemona attended.
But neuer more be Officer of mine.
Making it light to Cassio: Cassio, I loue thee,
Thy honestie, and loue doth mince this matter,
   Othe. I know Iago

Which patience could not passe
From him that fled, some strange Indignitie,
Yet surely Cassio, I beleeue receiu'd
As men in rage strike those that wish them best,
Though Cassio did some little wrong to him,
But Men are Men: The best sometimes forget,
More of this matter cannot I report,
When you your selfe did part them.
At blow, and thrust, euen as againe they were
(For this was briefe) I found them close together
I nere might say before. When I came backe
And Cassio high in oath: Which till to night
For that I heard the clinke, and fall of Swords,
Out-ran my purpose: and I return'd then rather
The Towne might fall in fright. He, (swift of foote)
Least by his clamour (as it so fell out)
My selfe, the crying Fellow did pursue,
Steppes in to Cassio, and entreats his pause:
To execute vpon him. Sir, this Gentleman,
And Cassio following him with determin'd Sword
There comes a Fellow, crying out for helpe,
Montano and my selfe being in speech,
Shall nothing wrong him. This it is Generall:
Yet I perswade my selfe, to speake the truth
Then it should do offence to Michaell Cassio.
I had rather haue this tongue cut from my mouth,
   Iago. Touch me not so neere,

Thou art no Souldier
Thou dost deliuer more, or lesse then Truth,
  Mon. If partially Affin'd, or league in office,
'Tis monstrous: Iago, who began't?
In night, and on the Court and Guard of safetie?
To Manage priuate, and domesticke Quarrell?
Yet wilde, the peoples hearts brim-full of feare,
Shall loose me. What in a Towne of warre,
Though he had twinn'd with me, both at a birth,
And he that is approu'd in this offence,
How this foule Rout began: Who set it on,
Shall sinke in my rebuke. Giue me to know
Or do but lift this Arme, the best of you
Assaies to leade the way. If I once stir,
And passion (hauing my best iudgement collied)
My blood begins my safer Guides to rule,
   Othe. Now by Heauen,

When violence assailes vs
And to defend our selues, it be a sinne
Vnlesse selfe-charitie be sometimes a vice,
By me, that's said, or done amisse this night,
Of all that I do know, nor know I ought
While I spare speech which something now offends me.
Your Officer Iago, can informe you,
   Mon. Worthy Othello, I am hurt to danger,

Of a night-brawler? Giue me answer to it
And spend your rich opinion, for the name
That you vnlace your reputation thus,
In mouthes of wisest Censure. What's the matter
The world hath noted. And your name is great
The grauitie, and stillnesse of your youth
   Othe. Worthy Montano, you were wont to be ciuill:

  Cas. I pray you pardon me, I cannot speake
   Othe. How comes it (Michaell) you are thus forgot?

Those legges, that brought me to a part of it
And would, in Action glorious, I had lost
Any begining to this peeuish oddes.
In opposition bloody. I cannot speake
Swords out, and tilting one at others breastes,
(As if some Planet had vnwitted men)
Deuesting them for Bed: and then, but now:
In Quarter, and in termes like Bride, and Groome
  Iago. I do not know: Friends all, but now, euen now.
Speake: who began this? On thy loue I charge thee?
Honest Iago, that lookes dead with greeuing,
From her propriety. What is the matter, Masters?
Silence that dreadfull Bell, it frights the Isle,
Holds his soule light: He dies vpon his Motion.
He that stirs next, to carue for his owne rage,
For Christian shame, put by this barbarous Brawle:
Which Heauen hath forbid the Ottamittes.
Are we turn'd Turkes? and to our selues do that
   Oth. Why how now hoa? From whence ariseth this?

Hold. The Generall speaks to you: hold for shame
Haue you forgot all place of sense and dutie?
   Iag. Hold hoa: Lieutenant, Sir Montano, Gentlemen:

   Othe. Hold for your liues

  Mon. I bleed still, I am hurt to th' death. He dies
  Othe. What is the matter heere?

Enter Othello, and Attendants.
You'le be asham'd for euer.
The Towne will rise. Fie, fie Lieutenant,
Who's that which rings the Bell: Diablo, hoa:
Helpe Masters. Heere's a goodly Watch indeed.
Helpe hoa. Lieutenant. Sir Montano:
Nay good Lieutenant. Alas Gentlemen:
  Iago. Away I say: go out and cry a Mutinie.
   Cassio. Drunke?

   Mon. Come, come: you're drunke

Or Ile knocke you o're the Mazard
   Cassio. Let me go (Sir)

I pray you Sir, hold your hand
  Mon. Nay, good Lieutenant:
  Cas. Dost thou prate, Rogue?
   Rod. Beate me?

Knaue in to a Twiggen-Bottle
  Cas. A Knaue teach me my dutie? Ile beate the
   Mon. What's the matter Lieutenant?

  Cas. You Rogue: you Rascall

Enter Cassio pursuing Rodorigo.
To cure him of this euill, But hearke, what noise?
I do loue Cassio well: and would do much
   Iago. Not I, for this faire Island,

To the Moore
It were an honest Action, to say so
With one of an ingraft Infirmitie,
Should hazard such a Place, as his owne Second
   Mon. And 'tis great pitty, that the Noble Moore

I pray you after the Lieutenant, go
  Iago. How now Rodorigo?

Enter Rodorigo.
And lookes not on his euills: is not this true?
Prizes the vertue that appeares in Cassio,
Perhaps he sees it not, or his good nature
The Generall were put in mind of it:
   Mont. It were well

If Drinke rocke not his Cradle
He'le watch the Horologe a double Set,
  Iago. 'Tis euermore his prologue to his sleepe,
   Mont. But is he often thus?

Will shake this Island
On some odde time of his infirmitie
I feare the trust Othello puts him in,
The one as long as th' other. 'Tis pittie of him:
'Tis to his vertue, a iust Equinox,
And giue direction. And do but see his vice,
He's a Souldier, fit to stand by Caesar,
   Iago. You see this Fellow, that is gone before,

Watch
  Monta. To th' Platforme (Masters) come, let's set the

Enter.
that I am drunke.
   Cas. Why very well then: you must not thinke then,

   Gent. Excellent well

now: I can stand well enough, and I speake well enough
is my right hand, and this is my left. I am not drunke
thinke Gentlemen, I am drunke: this is my Ancient, this
sinnes: Gentlemen let's looke to our businesse. Do not
no more of this: let's to our Affaires. Forgiue vs our
Lieutenant is to be saued before the Ancient. Let's haue
   Cassio. I: (but by your leaue) not before me. The

   Iago. And so do I too Lieutenant

nor any man of qualitie: I hope to be saued
   Cas. For mine owne part, no offence to the Generall,

   Iago. It's true, good Lieutenant

not be saued
there be soules must be saued, and there be soules must
that do's those things. Well: heau'ns aboue all: and
  Cas. No: for I hold him to be vnworthy of his Place,
   Iago. Will you heare't againe?

   Cassio. Why this is a more exquisite Song then the other

Some Wine hoa
And take thy awl'd Cloake about thee.
'Tis Pride that pulls the Country downe,
And thou art but of low degree:
He was a wight of high Renowne,
With that he cal'd the Tailor Lowne:
He held them Six pence all to deere,
His Breeches cost him but a Crowne,
King Stephen was anda worthy Peere,
   Iago. Oh sweet England.

   Mon. I am for it Lieutenant: and Ile do you Iustice

   Cas. To the health of our Generall

Pottle can be fill'd
He giues your Hollander a vomit, ere the next
dead drunke. He sweates not to ouerthrow your Almaine.
  Iago. Why, he drinkes you with facillitie, your Dane
   Cassio. Is your Englishmen so exquisite in his drinking?

nothing to your English
and your swag-belly'd Hollander, (drinke hoa) are
most potent in Potting. Your Dane, your Germaine,
   Iago. I learn'd it in England: where indeed they are

   Cas. 'Fore Heauen: an excellent Song

Some Wine Boyes
Why then let a Souldier drinke.
A Souldiers a man: Oh, mans life's but a span,
And let me the Cannakin clinke.
And let me the Cannakin clinke, clinke:
   Iago. Some Wine hoa.

Souldier
   Mon. Good-faith a litle one: not past a pint, as I am a

   Cas. 'Fore heauen, they haue giuen me a rowse already

My Boate sailes freely, both with winde and Streame
If Consequence do but approue my dreame,

Enter Cassio, Montano, and Gentlemen.
That may offend the Isle. But here they come.
Am I put to our Cassio in some Action
Now 'mongst this Flocke of drunkards
And they Watch too.
Haue I to night fluster'd with flowing Cups,
The very Elements of this Warrelike Isle)
(That hold their Honours in a wary distance,
Three else of Cyprus, Noble swelling Spirites,
Potations, pottle-deepe; and he's to watch.
To Desdemona hath to night Carrows'd.
Whom Loue hath turn'd almost the wrong side out,
Now my sicke Foole Rodorigo,
As my yong Mistris dogge.
He'l be as full of Quarrell, and offence
With that which he hath drunke to night alreadie,
  Iago. If I can fasten but one Cup vpon him

Enter.
   Cas. Ile do't, but it dislikes me.

  Iago. Heere, at the doore: I pray you call them in
   Cas. Where are they?

desire it
   Iago. What man? 'Tis a night of Reuels, the Gallants

dare not taske my weakenesse with any more
it makes heere. I am infortunate in the infirmity, and
was craftily qualified too: and behold what inouation
   Cassio. I haue drunke but one Cup to night, and that

drinke for you
   Iago. Oh, they are our Friends: but one Cup, Ile

Curtesie would inuent some other Custome of entertainment
and vnhappie Braines for drinking. I could well wish
   Cas. Not to night, good Iago, I haue very poore,

to the health of blacke Othello
brace of Cyprus Gallants, that would faine haue a measure
I haue a stope of Wine, and heere without are a
   Iago. Well: happinesse to their Sheetes. Come Lieutenant,

  Cas. She is indeed perfection
Is it not an Alarum to Loue?
   Iago. And when she speakes,

And yet me thinkes right modest
   Cas. An inuiting eye:

Me thinkes it sounds a parley to prouocation
   Iago. What an eye she ha's?

   Cas. Indeed shes a most fresh and delicate creature

   Iago. And Ile warrant her, full of Game

   Cas. She's a most exquisite Lady

she is sport for Ioue
he hath not yet made wanton the night with her: and
loue of his Desdemona: Who, let vs not therefore blame;
o'th' clocke. Our Generall cast vs thus earely for the
   Iago. Not this houre Lieutenant: 'tis not yet ten

  Cas. Welcome Iago: we must to the Watch

Enter Iago.

Enter.
Goodnight.
That profit's yet to come 'tweene me, and you.
The purchase made, the fruites are to ensue,
Let me haue speech with you. Come my deere Loue,
Michael, goodnight. To morrow with your earliest,
   Othe. Iago, is most honest:

Will I looke to't
But notwithstanding with my personall eye
   Cas. Iago, hath direction what to do.

Not to out-sport discretion
Let's teach our selues that Honourable stop,
  Othe. Good Michael, looke you to the guard to night.

Enter Othello, Desdemona, Cassio, and Attendants.

Enter.
Blesse the Isle of Cyprus, and our Noble Generall Othello.
present houre of fiue, till the Bell haue told eleuen.
are open, & there is full libertie of Feasting from this
much was his pleasure should be proclaimed. All offices
Newes, it is the Celebration of his Nuptiall. So
Reuels his addition leads him. For besides these beneficiall
some to make Bonfires, each man, to what Sport and
euery man put himselfe into Triumph. Some to daunce,
importing the meere perdition of the Turkish Fleete:
Generall. That vpon certaine tydings now arriu'd,
  Herald. It is Othello's pleasure, our Noble and Valiant

Enter Othello's Herald with a Proclamation.

Scena Secunda.


Enter.
Knaueries plaine face, is neuer seene, till vs'd.
Euen to madnesse. 'Tis heere: but yet confus'd,
And practising vpon his peace, and quiet,
For making him egregiously an Asse,
Make the Moore thanke me, loue me, and reward me,
(For I feare Cassio with my Night-Cape too)
Abuse him to the Moore, in the right garbe
Ile haue our Michael Cassio on the hip,
For his quicke hunting, stand the putting on,
If this poore Trash of Venice, whom I trace
That iudgement cannot cure. Which thing to do,
At least into a Ielouzie so strong
Or fayling so, yet that I put the Moore,
Till I am eeuen'd with him, wife, for wife.
And nothing can, or shall content my Soule
Doth (like a poysonous Minerall) gnaw my Inwardes:
Hath leap'd into my Seate. The thought whereof,
For that I do suspect the lustie Moore
But partely led to dyet my Reuenge,
I stand accomptant for as great a sin)
Not out of absolute Lust, (though peraduenture
A most deere husband. Now I do loue her too,
And I dare thinke, he'le proue to Desdemona
Is of a constant, louing, Noble Nature,
The Moore (howbeit that I endure him not)
That she loues him, 'tis apt, and of great Credite.
  Iago. That Cassio loues her, I do well beleeu't:

Enter.
   Rodo. Adieu.

Cittadell. I must fetch his Necessaries a Shore. Farewell
   Iago. I warrant thee. Meete me by and by at the

   Rodo. I will do this, if you can bring it to any opportunity

no expectation of our prosperitie
most profitably remoued, without the which there were
shall then haue to preferre them. And the impediment
haue a shorter iourney to your desires, by the meanes I
but by the displanting of Cassio. So shall you
Whose qualification shall come into no true taste againe,
euen out of that will I cause these of Cyprus to Mutiny.
happely may strike at you, prouoke him that he may: for
   Iago. Sir, he's rash, and very sodaine in Choller: and

   Rod. Well

you please, which the time shall more fauorably minister
tainting his discipline, or from what other course
to anger Cassio, either by speaking too loud, or
not: Ile not be farre from you. Do you finde some occasion
the Command, Ile lay't vpon you. Cassio knowes you
brought you from Venice. Watch you to night: for
conclusion: Pish. But Sir, be you rul'd by me. I haue
comes the Master, and maine exercise, th' incorporate
these mutabilities so marshall the way, hard at hand
embrac'd together. Villanous thoughts Rodorigo, when
They met so neere with their lippes, that their breathes
prologue to the History of Lust and foule Thoughts.
   Iago . Leacherie by this hand: an Index, and obscure

  Rod. Yes, that I did: but that was but curtesie
marke that?
not see her paddle with the palme of his hand? Didst not
neuer haue lou'd the Moore: Bless'd pudding. Didst thou
made of grapes. If shee had beene bless'd, shee would
   Iago. Bless'd figges-end. The Wine she drinkes is

bless'd condition
   Rodo. I cannot beleeue that in her, she's full of most

woman hath found him already
mindes looke after. A pestilent compleat knaue, and the
and hath all those requisites in him, that folly and greene
A diuelish knaue: besides, the knaue is handsome, young:
though true Aduantage neuer present it selfe.
that he's an eye can stampe, and counterfeit Aduantages,
why none: A slipper, and subtle knaue, a finder of occasion:
of his salt, and most hidden loose Affection? Why none,
of Ciuill, and Humaine seeming, for the better compasse
further conscionable, then in putting on the meere forme
this Fortune, as Cassio do's: a knaue very voluble: no
position) who stands so eminent in the degree of
Now Sir, this granted (as it is a most pregnant and vnforc'd
instruct her in it, and compell her to some second choice.
gorge, disrellish and abhorre the Moore, very Nature wil
tendernesse wil finde it selfe abus'd, begin to heaue the,
for want of these requir'd Conueniences, her delicate
and Beauties: all which the Moore is defectiue in. Now
Louelinesse in fauour, simpathy in yeares, Manners,
game to enflame it, and to giue Satiety a fresh appetite.
is made dull with the Act of Sport, there should be a
shall she haue to looke on the diuell? When the Blood
heart thinke it. Her eye must be fed. And what delight
lies. To loue him still for prating, let not thy discreet
the Moore, but for bragging, and telling her fantasticall
Marke me with what violence she first lou'd
   Iago. Lay thy finger thus: and let thy soule be instructed.

   Rod. With him? Why, 'tis not possible

thee this: Desdemona, is directly in loue with him
night watches on the Court of Guard. First, I must tell
more then is natiue to them) list-me; the Lieutenant to
being in Loue, haue then a Nobilitie in their Natures,
Come thither, if thou be'st Valiant, (as they say base men
  Iago. Do thou meet me presently at the Harbour.

Exit Othello and Desdemona.

Once more well met at Cyprus.
Do's challenge much respect. Come Desdemona,
He is a good one, and his worthynesse
Bring thou the Master to the Cittadell,
Go to the Bay, and disimbarke my Coffers:
In mine owne comforts. I prythee, good Iago,
I prattle out of fashion, and I doate
I haue found great loue among'st them. Oh my Sweet,
(Hony) you shall be well desir'd in Cyprus,
How do's my old Acquaintance of this Isle?
The Turkes are drown'd.
Newes (Friends) our Warres are done:
   Othe. Come: let vs to the Castle.

the peggs that make this Musicke, as honest as I am
   Iago. Oh you are well tun'd now: But Ile set downe

That ere our hearts shall make
And this, and this the greatest discords be
It stoppes me heere: it is too much of ioy.
I cannot speake enough of this content,
   Othe. Amen to that (sweet Powers)

Euen as our dayes do grow
And Comforts should encrease
But that our Loues
   Des. The Heauens forbid

Succeedes in vnknowne Fate
That not another comfort like to this,
My Soule hath her content so absolute,
'Twere now to be most happy. For I feare,
As hell's from Heauen. If it were now to dye,
Olympus high: and duck againe as low,
And let the labouring Barke climbe hills of Seas
May the windes blow, till they haue waken'd death:
If after euery Tempest, come such Calmes,
Oh my Soules Ioy:
To see you heere before me.
   Othe. It giues me wonder great, as my content

   Des. My deere Othello

  Oth. O, my faire Warriour

Enter Othello, and Attendants.
   Cassio. Loe, where he comes.

   Des. Let's meete him, and recieue him

   Cassio. 'Tis truely so

The Moore I know his Trumpet
sake.
lippes? Would they were Cluster-pipes for your
'tis so indeed. Yet againe, your fingers to your
the Sir, in. Very good: well kiss'd, and excellent Curtsie:
so oft, which now againe you are most apt to play
it had beene better you had not kiss'd your three fingers
If such tricks as these strip you out of your Lieutenantrie,
in thine owne Courtship. You say true, 'tis so indeed.
a Fly as Cassio. I smile vpon her, do: I will giue thee
With as little a web as this, will I ensnare as great
   Iago. He takes her by the palme: I, well said, whisper.

him more in the Souldier, then in the Scholler
  Cassio. He speakes home (Madam) you may rellish
Counsailor?
How say you (Cassio) is he not a most prophane, and liberall
not learne of him aemillia, though he be thy husband.
   Desde. Oh most lame and impotent conclusion. Do

  Iago. To suckle Fooles, and chronicle small Beere
  Des. To do what?
She was a wight, (if euer such wightes were)
See Suitors following, and not looke behind:
She that could thinke, and neu'r disclose her mind,
To change the Cods-head for the Salmons taile:
She that in wisedome neuer was so fraile,
Bad her wrong stay, and her displeasure flie:
She that being angred, her reuenge being nie,
Fled from her wish, and yet said now I may.
Neuer lackt Gold, and yet went neuer gay,
Had Tongue at will, and yet was neuer loud:
   Iago. She that was euer faire, and neuer proud,

selfe
merit, did iustly put on the vouch of very malice it
woman indeed? One, that in the authorithy of her
best. But what praise could'st thou bestow on a deseruing
   Desde. Oh heauy ignorance: thou praisest the worst

But do's foule pranks, which faire, and wise-ones do
   Iago. There's none so foule and foolish thereunto,

for her that's Foule, and Foolish
laugh i'th' Alehouse. What miserable praise hast thou
   Desde. These are old fond Paradoxes, to make Fooles

For euen her folly helpt her to an heire
  Iago. She neuer yet was foolish that was faire,
Aemil. How if Faire, and Foolish?
   Des. Worse, and worse.

She'le find a white, that shall her blacknesse fit
  Iago. If she be blacke, and thereto haue a wit,
How if she be Blacke and Witty?
   Des. Well prais'd:

The ones for vse, the other vseth it
If she be faire, and wise: fairenesse, and wit,
is deliuer'd.
out Braines and all. But my Muse labours, and thus she
from my pate, as Birdlyme do's from Freeze, it pluckes
  Iago. I am about it, but indeed my inuention comes
Come, how would'st thou praise me?
The thing I am, by seeming otherwise.
   Des. I am not merry: but I do beguile

  Iago. I Madam
There's one gone to the Harbour?
   Des. Come on, assay.

For I am nothing, if not Criticall
  Iago. Oh, gentle Lady, do not put me too't,
praise me?
   Desde. What would'st write of me, if thou should'st

   Iago. No, let me not

Aemil. You shall not write my praise
You rise to play, and go to bed to worke.
   Iago. Nay, it is true: or else I am a Turke,

   Des. Oh, fie vpon thee, Slanderer

Beds
Players in your Huswiferie, and Huswiues in your
Saints in your Iniuries: Diuels being offended:
doore: Bells in your Parlours: Wilde-Cats in your Kitchens:
   Iago. Come on, come on: you are Pictures out of

   aemil. You haue little cause to say so

And chides with thinking
She puts her tongue a little in her heart,
Marry before your Ladyship, I grant,
I finde it still, when I haue leaue to sleepe.
   Iago. Infaith too much:

   Des. Alas: she ha's no speech

You would haue enough
As of her tongue she oft bestowes on me,
   Iago. Sir, would she giue you so much of her lippes,

That giues me this bold shew of Curtesie
That I extend my Manners. 'Tis my breeding,
Let it not gaule your patience (good Iago)
Good Ancient, you are welcome. Welcome Mistris:
   Cassio. See for the Newes:

This likewise is a Friend
   Gent. They giue this greeting to the Cittadell:

   Within. A Saile, a Saile

Parted our fellowship. But hearke, a Saile
  Cassio. The great Contention of Sea, and Skies
How lost you company?
   Des. Oh, but I feare:

But that he's well, and will be shortly heere
  Cas. He is not yet arriu'd, nor know I ought
What tydings can you tell of my Lord?
   Des. I thanke you, Valiant Cassio,

Enwheele thee round
Before, behinde thee, and on euery hand
Haile to thee Ladie: and the grace of Heauen,
You men of Cyprus, let her haue your knees.
The Riches of the Ship is come on shore:
Oh behold,

Enter Desdemona, Iago, Rodorigo, and Aemilia.

Giue renew'd fire to our extincted Spirits.
Make loues quicke pants in Desdemonaes Armes,
That he may blesse this Bay with his tall Ship,
And swell his Saile with thine owne powrefull breath,
A Senights speed. Great Ioue, Othello guard,
Whose footing heere anticipates our thoughts,
Left in the conduct of the bold Iago,
Our great Captains Captaine,
  Cassio. She that I spake of:
   Mon. What is she?

The Diuine Desdemona
Their mortall Natures, letting go safely by
As hauing sence of Beautie, do omit
Traitors ensteep'd, to enclogge the guiltlesse Keele,
The gutter'd-Rockes, and Congregated Sands,
Tempests themselues, high Seas, and howling windes,
   Cassio. Ha's had most fauourable, and happie speed:

  Gent. 'Tis one Iago, Auncient to the Generall
How now? Who ha's put in?

Enter Gentleman.
Do's tyre the Ingeniuer.
And in th' essentiall Vesture of Creation,
One that excels the quirkes of Blazoning pens,
That paragons description, and wilde Fame:
  Cassio. Most fortunately: he hath atchieu'd a Maid
  Mon. But good Lieutenant, is your Generall wiu'd?

Enter.
   Gent. I shall.

And giue vs truth who 'tis that is arriu'd
   Cassio. I pray you Sir, go forth,

Our Friends, at least
   Gent. They do discharge their Shot of Courtesie,

   Cassio. My hopes do shape him for the Gouernor

Stand rankes of People and they cry, a Saile
  Gent. The Towne is empty; on the brow o'th' Sea
   Cassio. What noise?

   Within. A Saile, a Saile, a Saile

Stand in bold Cure
Therefore my hope's (not surfetted to death)
Of verie expert, and approu'd Allowance;
  Cassio. His Barke is stoutly Timber'd, and his Pylot
   Mon. Is he well ship'd?

For I haue lost him on a dangerous Sea
Giue him defence against the Elements,
That so approoue the Moore: Oh let the Heauens
  Cassi. Thankes you, the valiant of the warlike Isle,

Enter Cassio.
Of more Arriuancie.
For euery Minute is expectancie
   Gent. Come, let's do so;

An indistinct regard
Euen till we make the Maine, and th' Eriall blew,
As to throw-out our eyes for braue Othello,
As well to see the Vessell that's come in,
Like a full Soldier. Let's to the Sea-side (hoa)
For I haue seru'd him, and the man commands
   Mon. Pray Heauens he be:

With fowle and violent Tempest
And praye the Moore be safe; for they were parted
Touching the Turkish losse, yet he lookes sadly,
   3 But this same Cassio, though he speake of comfort,

'Tis a worthy Gouernour
   Mon. I am glad on't:

And is in full Commission heere for Cyprus
Is come on Shore: the Moore himselfe at Sea,
Lieutenant to the warlike Moore, Othello,
  3 The Ship is heere put in: A Verennessa, Michael Cassio
   Mon. How? Is this true?

On most part of their Fleet
Hath seene a greeuous wracke and sufferance
That their designement halts. A Noble ship of Venice,
The desperate Tempest hath so bang'd the Turkes,
  3 Newes Laddes: our warres are done:

Enter a Gentleman.
It is impossible to beare it out.
Be not enshelter'd, and embay'd, they are drown'd,
   Men. If that the Turkish Fleete

On the enchafed Flood
I neuer did like mollestation view
And quench the Guards of th' euer-fixed Pole:
Seemes to cast water on the burning Beare,
The winde-shak'd-Surge, with high & monstrous Maine
The chidden Billow seemes to pelt the Clowds,
For do but stand vpon the Foaming Shore,
  2 A Segregation of the Turkish Fleet:
Can hold the Morties. What shall we heare of this?
What ribbes of Oake, when Mountaines melt on them,
If it hath ruffiand so vpon the Sea,
A fuller blast ne're shooke our Battlements:
   Mon. Me thinks, the wind hath spoke aloud at Land,

Descry a Saile
I cannot 'twixt the Heauen, and the Maine,
  1.Gent. Nothing at all, it is a high wrought Flood:
  Mon. What from the Cape, can you discerne at Sea?

Enter Montano, and two Gentlemen.

Actus Secundus. Scena Prima.

Must bring this monstrous Birth, to the worlds light.
I hau't: it is engendred: Hell, and Night,
As Asses are:
And will as tenderly be lead by'th' Nose
That thinkes men honest, that but seeme to be so,
The Moore is of a free, and open Nature,
To be suspected: fram'd to make women false.
He hath a person, and a smooth dispose
That he is too familiar with his wife:
After some time, to abuse Othello's eares,
In double Knauery. How? How? Let's see.
To get his Place, and to plume vp my will
Cassio's a proper man: Let me see now,
The better shall my purpose worke on him:
Will do, as if for Surety. He holds me well,
But I, for meere suspition in that kinde,
She ha's done my Office. I know not if't be true,
And it is thought abroad, that 'twixt my sheets
But for my Sport, and Profit: I hate the Moore,
If I would time expend with such Snipe,
For I mine owne gain'd knowledge should prophane
  Iago. Thus do I euer make my Foole, my purse:

Enter.
  Rod. Ile sell all my Land.
   Iago. Go too, farewell. Do you heare Rodorigo?

   Rod. Ile be with thee betimes

  Iago. At my Lodging
   Rod. Where shall we meete i'th' morning?

Adieu
prouide thy Money. We will haue more of this to morrow.
Wombe of Time, which wilbe deliuered. Trauerse, go,
pleasure, me a sport. There are many Euents in the
him. If thou canst Cuckold him, thou dost thy selfe a
reason. Let vs be coniunctiue in our reuenge, against
hate the Moore. My cause is hearted; thine hath no lesse
told thee often, and I re-tell thee againe, and againe, I
  Iago. Thou art sure of me: Go make Money: I haue
the issue?
   Rodo. Wilt thou be fast to my hopes, if I depend on

drown'd, and go without her
to be hang'd in Compassing thy ioy, then to be
thy selfe, it is cleane out of the way. Seeke thou rather
shalt enioy her: therefore make Money: a pox of drowning
not too hard for my wits, and all the Tribe of hell, thou
an erring Barbarian, and super-subtle Venetian be
thou canst: If Sanctimonie, and a fraile vow, betwixt
it a more delicate way then drowning. Make all the Money
in thy purse. If thou wilt needs damne thy selfe, do
she will find the errors of her choice. Therefore, put Money
must change for youth: when she is sated with his body
shalbe to him shortly, as bitter as Coloquintida. She
The Food that to him now is as lushious as Locusts,
are changeable in their wils: fill thy purse with Money.
put but Money in thy purse. These Moores
in her, and thou shalt see an answerable Sequestration,
thy purse: nor he his to her. It was a violent Commencement
should continue her loue to the Moore. Put Money in
put Money in thy purse. It cannot be long that Desdemona
Warres, defeate thy fauour, with an vsurp'd Beard. I say
then now. Put Money in thy purse: follow thou the
perdurable toughnesse. I could neuer better steed thee
and I confesse me knit to thy deseruing, with Cables of
Cats, and blind Puppies. I haue profest me thy Friend,
of the will. Come, be a man: drowne thy selfe? Drown
   Iago. It is meerly a Lust of the blood, and a permission

   Rod. It cannot be

call Loue, to be a Sect, or Seyen
Stings, or vnbitted Lusts: whereof I take this, that you
haue Reason to coole our raging Motions, our carnall
conduct vs to most prepostrous Conclusions. But we
the blood, and basenesse of our Natures would
had not one Scale of Reason, to poize another of Sensualitie,
of this lies in our Wills. If the braine of our liues
with Industry, why the power, and Corrigeable authoritie
many: either to haue it sterrill with idlenesse, or manured
Supplie it with one gender of Hearbes, or distract it with
or sowe Lettice: Set Hisope, and weede vp Time:
our Wills are Gardiners. So that if we will plant Nettels,
thus, or thus. Our Bodies are our Gardens, to the which,
   Iago. Vertue? A figge, 'tis in our selues that we are

to be so fond, but it is not in my vertue to amend it
   Rod. What should I do? I confesse it is my shame

change my Humanity with a Baboone
drowne my selfe for the loue of a Gynney Hen, I would
knew how to loue himselfe. Ere I would say, I would
betwixt a Benefit, and an Iniurie: I neuer found man that
for foure times seuen yeares, and since I could distinguish
   Iago. Oh villanous: I haue look'd vpon the world

our Physition
and then haue we a prescription to dye, when death is
  Rod. It is sillynesse to liue, when to liue is torment:
thou silly Gentleman?
   Iago. If thou do'st, I shall neuer loue thee after. Why

   Rod. I will incontinently drowne my selfe

  Iago. Why go to bed and sleepe
  Rod. What will I do, think'st thou?
   Iago. What saist thou Noble heart?

  Rod. Iago

Enter.
To spend with thee. We must obey the time.
Of Loue, of wordly matter, and direction
Come Desdemona, I haue but an houre
And bring them after in the best aduantage.
I prythee let thy wife attend on her,
My Desdemona must I leaue to thee:
  Othe. My life vpon her faith. Honest Iago,

Enter.
She ha's deceiu'd her Father, and may thee.
   Bra. Looke to her (Moore) if thou hast eies to see:

   Sen. Adieu braue Moore, vse Desdemona well

Your Son-in-law is farre more Faire then Blacke
If Vertue no delighted Beautie lacke,
Good night to euery one. And Noble Signior,
   Duke. Let it be so:

To be sent after me
With what else needfull, your good Grace shall think
To his conueyance I assigne my wife,
A man he is of honesty and trust:
   Othe. So please your Grace, my Ancient,

As doth import you
And such things else of qualitie and respect
And he shall our Commission bring to you:
Othello, leaue some Officer behind
   Duke. At nine i'th' morning, here wee'l meete againe.

   Othe. With all my heart

   Sen. You must away to night

And speed must answer it
Either for her stay, or going: th' Affaire cries hast:
   Duke. Be it as you shall priuately determine,

Make head against my Estimation
And all indigne, and base aduersities,
Let House-wiues make a Skillet of my Helme,
That my Disports corrupt, and taint my businesse:
My speculatiue, and offic'd Instrument:
Of feather'd Cupid, seele with wanton dulnesse
When she is with me. No, when light wing'd Toyes
I will your serious and great businesse scant
And Heauen defend your good soules, that you thinke
But to be free, and bounteous to her minde:
In my defunct, and proper satisfaction.
Nor to comply with heat the yong affects
To please the pallate of my Appetite:
Vouch with me Heauen, I therefore beg it not
   Othe. Let her haue your voice.

By his deere absence. Let me go with him
And I a heauie interim shall support
The Rites for why I loue him, are bereft me:
A Moth of Peace, and he go to the Warre,
So that (deere Lords) if I be left behind
Did I my soule and Fortunes consecrate.
And to his Honours and his valiant parts,
I saw Othello's visage in his mind,
Euen to the very quality of my Lord;
May trumpet to the world. My heart's subdu'd
My downe-right violence, and storme of Fortunes,
  Des. That I loue the Moore, to liue with him,
   Duke. What would you Desdemona?

T' assist my simplenesse
And let me finde a Charter in your voice
To my vnfolding, lend your prosperous eare,
By being in his eye. Most Gracious Duke,
To put my Father in impatient thoughts
   Des. Nor would I there recide,

   Othe. Nor I

  Bra. I will not haue it so
   Duke. Why at her Fathers?

As leuels with her breeding
With such Accomodation and besort
Due reference of Place, and Exhibition,
I craue fit disposition for my Wife,
Most humbly therefore bending to your State,
This present Warres against the Ottamites.
I finde in hardnesse: and do vndertake
A Naturall and prompt Alacratie,
My thrice-driuen bed of Downe. I do agnize
Hath made the flinty and Steele Coach of Warre
   Othe. The Tirant Custome, most Graue Senators,

and boystrous expedition
the glosse of your new Fortunes, with this more stubborne,
voice on you: you must therefore be content to slubber
soueraigne Mistris of Effects, throwes a more safer
of most allowed sufficiencie; yet opinion, a more
best knowne to you. And though we haue there a Substitute
makes for Cyprus: Othello, the Fortitude of the place is
   Duke. The Turke with a most mighty Preparation

I humbly beseech you proceed to th' Affaires of State
That the bruized heart was pierc'd through the eares.
But words are words, I neuer yet did heare:
Being strong on both sides, are Equiuocall.
These Sentences, to Sugar, or to Gall,
That to pay griefe, must of poore Patience borrow.
But he beares both the Sentence, and the sorrow,
But the free comfort which from thence he heares.
He beares the Sentence well, that nothing beares,
We loose it not so long as we can smile:
   Bra. So let the Turke of Cyprus vs beguile,

He robs himselfe, that spends a bootelesse griefe
The rob'd that smiles, steales something from the Thiefe,
Patience, her Iniury a mock'ry makes.
What cannot be preseru'd, when Fortune takes:
Is the next way to draw new mischiefe on.
To mourne a Mischeefe that is past and gon,
By seeing the worst, which late on hopes depended.
When remedies are past, the griefes are ended
Which as a grise, or step may helpe these Louers.
And lay a Sentence,
   Duke. Let me speake like your selfe:

To hang clogges on them. I haue done my Lord
For thy escape would teach me Tirranie
I am glad at soule, I haue no other Child,
I would keepe from thee. For your sake (Iewell)
Which but thou hast already, with all my heart
I here do giue thee that with all my heart,
Come hither Moore;
I had rather to adopt a Child, then get it.
Please it your Grace, on to the State Affaires;
   Bra. God be with you: I haue done.

Due to the Moore my Lord
So much I challenge, that I may professe
To you, preferring you before her Father:
And so much dutie, as my Mother shew'd
I am hitherto your Daughter. But heere's my Husband;
How to respect you. You are the Lord of duty,
My life and education both do learne me,
To you I am bound for life, and education:
I do perceiue heere a diuided dutie.
  Des. My Noble Father,
Where most you owe obedience?
Do you perceiue in all this Noble Companie,
Light on the man. Come hither gentle Mistris,
Destruction on my head, if my bad blame
If she confesse that she was halfe the wooer,
   Bra. I pray you heare her speake?

Then their bare hands
Men do their broken Weapons rather vse,
Good Brabantio, take vp this mangled matter at the best:
  Duke. I thinke this tale would win my Daughter too,

Enter Desdemona, Iago, Attendants.

Here comes the Ladie: Let her witnesse it.
This onely is the witch-craft I haue vs'd.
And I lou'd her, that she did pitty them.
She lou'd me for the dangers I had past,
And that would wooe her. Vpon this hint I spake,
I should but teach him how to tell my Story,
And bad me, if I had a Friend that lou'd her,
That Heauen had made her such a man. She thank'd me,
She wish'd she had not heard it, yet she wish'd
'Twas pittifull: 'twas wondrous pittifull.
She swore in faith 'twas strange: 'twas passing strange,
She gaue me for my paines a world of kisses:
That my youth suffer'd: My Storie being done,
When I did speake of some distressefull stroke
And often did beguile her of her teares,
But not instinctiuely: I did consent,
Whereof by parcels she had something heard,
That I would all my Pilgrimage dilate,
To draw from her a prayer of earnest heart,
Tooke once a pliant houre, and found good meanes
Deuoure vp my discourse. Which I obseruing,
She'l'd come againe, and with a greedie eare
Which euer as she could with haste dispatch,
But still the house Affaires would draw her hence:
Would Desdemona seriously incline:
Grew beneath their shoulders. These things to heare,
The Antropophague, and men whose heads
And of the Canibals that each others eate,
It was my hint to speake. Such was my Processe,
Rough Quarries, Rocks, Hills, whose head touch heauen,
Wherein of Antars vast, and Desarts idle,
And portance in my Trauellours historie.
And sold to slauery. Of my redemption thence,
Of being taken by the Insolent Foe,
Of haire-breadth scapes i'th' imminent deadly breach;
Of mouing Accidents by Flood and Field,
Wherein I spoke of most disastrous chances:
Toth' very moment that he bad me tell it.
I ran it through, euen from my boyish daies,
That I haue past.
From yeare to yeare: the Battaile, Sieges, Fortune,
Still question'd me the Storie of my life,
   Othe. Her Father lou'd me, oft inuited me:

   Duke. Say it Othello

And she in mine
How I did thriue in this faire Ladies loue,
So iustly to your Graue eares, Ile present
I do confesse the vices of my blood,
And tell she come, as truely as to heauen,
You best know the place.
   Othe. Aunciant, conduct them:

   Duke. Fetch Desdemona hither

Euen fall vpon my life
Not onely take away, but let your Sentence
The Trust, the Office, I do hold of you,
If you do finde me foule, in her report,
And let her speake of me before her Father;
Send for the Lady to the Sagitary,
  Othel. I do beseech you,
As soule, to soule affordeth?
Or came it by request, and such faire question
Subdue, and poyson this yong Maides affections?
Did you, by indirect, and forced courses
   Sen. But Othello, speake,

Of moderne seeming, do prefer against him
Then these thin habits, and poore likely-hoods
Without more wider, and more ouer Test
To vouch this, is no proofe,
He wrought vpon her.
Or with some Dram, (coniur'd to this effect)
That with some Mixtures, powrefull o're the blood,
Why this should be. I therefore vouch againe,
To find out practises of cunning hell
Against all rules of Nature, and must be driuen
That will confesse Perfection so could erre
It is a iudgement main'd, and most imperfect.
To fall in Loue, with what she fear'd to looke on;
Of Yeares, of Country, Credite, euery thing
Blush'd at her selfe, and she, in spight of Nature,
Of Spirit so still, and quiet, that her Motion
   Bra. A Maiden, neuer bold:

I won his Daughter
(For such proceeding I am charg'd withall)
What Coniuration, and what mighty Magicke,
What Drugges, what Charmes,
Of my whole course of Loue.
I will a round vn-varnish'd Tale deliuer,
In speaking for my selfe. Yet, (by your gratious patience)
And therefore little shall I grace my cause,
More then pertaines to Feats of Broiles, and Battaile,
And little of this great world can I speake,
Their deerest action, in the Tented Field:
Till now, some nine Moones wasted, they haue vs'd
For since these Armes of mine, had seuen yeares pith,
And little bless'd with the soft phrase of Peace;
Hath this extent; no more. Rude am I, in my speech,
The verie head, and front of my offending,
It is most true: true I haue married her;
That I haue tane away this old mans Daughter,
My very Noble, and approu'd good Masters;
   Othe. Most Potent, Graue, and Reueren'd Signiors,

  Bra. Nothing, but this is so
   Duke. What in your owne part, can you say to this?

   All. We are verie sorry for't

Hath hither brought
Your speciall Mandate, for the State affaires
Here is the man; this Moore, whom now it seemes
   Bra. Humbly I thanke your Grace,

Stood in your Action
After your owne sense: yea, though our proper Son
You shall your selfe read, in the bitter letter,
And you of her; the bloodie Booke of Law,
Hath thus beguil'd your Daughter of her selfe,
   Duke. Who ere he be, that in this foule proceeding

Sans witch-craft could not
(Being not deficient, blind, or lame of sense,)
For Nature, so prepostrously to erre,
By Spels, and Medicines, bought of Mountebanks;
She is abus'd, stolne from me, and corrupted
  Bra. I, to me.
  Sen. Dead?
  Bra. My Daughter: oh my Daughter!
   Duke. Why? What's the matter?

And it is still it selfe
That it engluts, and swallowes other sorrowes,
Is of so flood-gate, and ore-bearing Nature,
Take hold on me. For my perticular griefe
Hath rais'd me from my bed; nor doth the generall care
Neither my place, nor ought I heard of businesse
   Bra. So did I yours: Good your Grace pardon me.

We lack't your Counsaile, and your helpe to night
I did not see you: welcome gentle Signior,
Against the generall Enemy Ottoman.
  Duke. Valiant Othello, we must straight employ you,

Enter Brabantio, Othello, Cassio, Iago, Rodorigo, and Officers.

   1.Sen. Here comes Brabantio, and the Valiant Moore.

To him, Post, Post-haste, dispatch
   Duke. Write from vs,

  1.Sen. He's now in Florence
Marcus Luccicos is not he in Towne?
   Duke. 'Tis certaine then for Cyprus:

And prayes you to beleeue him
With his free dutie, recommends you thus,
Your trustie and most Valiant Seruitour,
Their purposes toward Cyprus. Signior Montano,
Their backward course, bearing with frank appearance
  Mess. Of thirtie Saile: and now they do re-stem
   1.Sen. I, so I thought: how many, as you guesse?

Haue there inioynted them with an after Fleete
Steering with due course toward the Ile of Rhodes,
  Messen. The Ottamites, Reueren'd, and Gracious,

Enter a Messenger.

   Officer. Here is more Newes.

   Duke. Nay, in all confidence he's not for Rhodes

To wake, and wage a danger profitlesse
Neglecting an attempt of ease, and gaine
To leaue that latest, which concernes him first,
We must not thinke the Turke is so vnskillfull,
That Rhodes is dress'd in. If we make thought of this,
But altogether lackes th' abilities
For that it stands not in such Warrelike brace,
So may he with more facile question beare it,
That as it more concernes the Turke then Rhodes,
And let our selues againe but vnderstand,
Th' importancie of Cyprus to the Turke;
To keepe vs in false gaze, when we consider
By no assay of reason. 'Tis a Pageant
  1.Sen. This cannot be
   Duke. How say you by this change?

By Signior Angelo
So was I bid report here to the State,
  Sailor. The Turkish Preparation makes for Rhodes,
   Duke. Now? What's the businesse?

  Officer. A Messenger from the Gallies

Enter Saylor.

   Saylor within. What hoa, what hoa, what hoa.

In fearefull sense
But the maine Article I do approue
I do not so secure me in the Error,
   Duke. Nay, it is possible enough to iudgement:

A Turkish Fleete, and bearing vp to Cyprus
'Tis oft with difference) yet do they all confirme
(As in these Cases where the ayme reports,
But though they iumpe not on a iust accompt,
   2.Sena. And mine two Hundred:

   Duke. And mine a Hundred fortie

My Letters say, a Hundred and seuen Gallies
   1.Sen. Indeed, they are disproportioned;

That giues them Credite
  Duke. There's no composition in this Newes,

Enter Duke, Senators, and Officers.

Scaena Tertia.

Exeunt.

Bond-slaues, and Pagans shall our Statesmen be.
For if such Actions may haue passage free,
Cannot but feele this wrong, as 'twere their owne:
Or any of my Brothers of the State,
Mine's not an idle Cause. The Duke himselfe,
In this time of the night? Bring him away;
   Bra. How? The Duke in Counsell?

I am sure is sent for
The Dukes in Counsell, and your Noble selfe,
   Officer. 'Tis true most worthy Signior,

To bring me to him
Vpon some present businesse of the State,
Whose Messengers are heere about my side,
How may the Duke be therewith satisfi'd,
   Othe. What if I do obey?

Call thee to answer
Of Law, and course of direct Session
  Bra. To Prison, till fit time
To answere this your charge?
Without a Prompter. Whether will you that I goe
Were it my Cue to fight, I should haue knowne it
Both you of my inclining, and the rest.
   Othe. Hold your hands

Subdue him, at his perill
Lay hold vpon him, if he do resist
Of Arts inhibited, and out of warrant;
For an abuser of the World, a practiser
I therefore apprehend and do attach thee,
'Tis probable, and palpable to thinking;
That weakens Motion. Ile haue't disputed on,
Abus'd her delicate Youth, with Drugs or Minerals,
That thou hast practis'd on her with foule Charmes,
Iudge me the world, if 'tis not grosse in sense,
Of such a thing as thou: to feare, not to delight?
Run from her Guardage to the sootie bosome,
Would euer haue (t' encurre a generall mocke)
The wealthy curled Deareling of our Nation,
So opposite to Marriage, that she shun'd
Whether a Maid, so tender, Faire, and Happie,
(If she in Chaines of Magick were not bound)
For Ile referre me to all things of sense,
Damn'd as thou art, thou hast enchaunted her
Where hast thou stow'd my Daughter?
   Bra. Oh thou foule Theefe,

yeares, then with your Weapons
rust them. Good Signior, you shall more command with
   Othe. Keepe vp your bright Swords, for the dew will

   Iago. You, Rodorigo? Come Sir, I am for you

   Bra. Downe with him, Theefe

   Rodo. Signior, it is the Moore

   Othello. Holla, stand there

He comes to bad intent
  Iago. It is Brabantio: Generall be aduis'd,

Enter Brabantio, Rodorigo, with Officers, and Torches.

   Cassio. Here comes another Troope to seeke for you.

  Othel. Haue with you
  Iago. Marry to- Come Captaine, will you go?
   Cassio. To who?

   Iago. He's married

   Cassio. I do not vnderstand

If it proue lawfull prize, he's made for euer
  Iago. Faith, he to night hath boarded a Land Carract,
   Cassio. Aunciant, what makes he heere?

And goe with you
I will but spend a word here in the house,
   Othel. 'Tis well I am found by you:

To search you out
The Senate hath sent about three seuerall Quests,
When being not at your Lodging to be found,
Are at the Dukes already. You haue bin hotly call'd for,
And many of the Consuls, rais'd and met,
This very night, at one anothers heeles:
Haue sent a dozen sequent Messengers
It is a businesse of some heate. The Gallies
  Cassio. Something from Cyprus, as I may diuine:
   Othello. What is the matter, thinke you?

Euen on the instant
And he requires your haste, Post-haste appearance,
  Cassio. The Duke do's greet you (Generall)
What is the Newes?
The goodnesse of the Night vpon you (Friends)
And my Lieutenant?
   Othel. The Seruants of the Dukes?

  Iago. By Ianus, I thinke no
Shall manifest me rightly. Is it they?
My Parts, my Title, and my perfect Soule
   Othel. Not I: I must be found.

You were best go in
  Iago. Those are the raised Father, and his Friends:

Enter Cassio, with Torches.

For the Seas worth. But looke, what Lights come yond?
Put into Circumscription, and Confine,
I would not my vnhoused free condition
But that I loue the gentle Desdemona,
As this that I haue reach'd. For know Iago,
May speake (vnbonnetted) to as proud a Fortune
From Men of Royall Seige. And my demerites
I shall promulgate. I fetch my life and being,
Which when I know, that boasting is an Honour,
Shall out-tongue his Complaints. 'Tis yet to know,
My Seruices, which I haue done the Signorie
   Othel. Let him do his spight;

Will giue him Cable
The Law (with all his might, to enforce it on)
Or put vpon you, what restraint or greeuance,
As double as the Dukes: He will diuorce you.
And hath in his effect a voice potentiall
That the Magnifico is much belou'd,
Are you fast married? Be assur'd of this,
I did full hard forbeare him. But I pray you Sir,
Against your Honor, that with the little godlinesse I haue
And spoke such scuruy, and prouoking termes
   Iago. Nay but he prated,

   Othello. 'Tis better as it is

I had thought t'haue yerk'd him here vnder the Ribbes
Sometime to do me seruice. Nine, or ten times
To do no contriu'd Murder: I lacke Iniquitie
Yet do I hold it very stuffe o'th' conscience
  Ia. Though in the trade of Warre I haue slaine men,

Enter Othello, Iago, Attendants, with Torches.

Scena Secunda.


Exeunt.

On good Rodorigo, I will deserue your paines.
And raise some speciall Officers of might:
(I may command at most) get Weapons (hoa)
   Bra. Pray you lead on. At euery house Ile call,

To get good Guard, and go along with me
  Rod. I thinke I can discouer him, if you please
Where we may apprehend her, and the Moore?
Some one way, some another. Doe you know
   Bra. Call vp my Brother: oh would you had had her.

  Rod. Yes Sir: I haue indeed
Of some such thing?
May be abus'd? Haue you not read Rodorigo,
By which the propertie of Youth, and Maidhood
By what you see them act. Is there not Charmes,
Fathers, from hence trust not your Daughters minds
Oh treason of the blood.
   Bra. Oh Heauen: how got she out?

  Rodo. Truely I thinke they are
Raise all my Kindred. Are they married thinke you?
Past thought:) what said she to you? Get moe Tapers.
How didst thou know 'twas she? (Oh she deceaues me
With the Moore saist thou? (Who would be a Father?)
Where didst thou see her? (Oh vnhappie Girle)
Is naught but bitternesse. Now Rodorigo,
And what's to come of my despised time,
  Bra. It is too true an euill. Gone she is,

Enter Brabantio, with Seruants and Torches.

Enter.

And there will I be with him. So farewell.
Lead to the Sagitary the raised Search:
(Which is indeed but signe) that you shal surely find him
I must show out a Flag, and signe of Loue,
Yet, for necessitie of present life,
Though I do hate him as I do hell paines,
To lead their Businesse. In which regard,
Another of his Fadome, they haue none,
(Which euen now stands in Act) that for their soules
With such loud reason to the Cyprus Warres,
Cannot with safetie cast-him. For he's embark'd
(How euer this may gall him with some checke)
Against the Moore. For I do know the State,
To be producted, (as if I stay, I shall,)
It seemes not meete, nor wholesome to my place
  Iag. Farewell: for I must leaue you.

Enter.
Light, I say, light.
Beleefe of it oppresses me alreadie.
This Accident is not vnlike my dreame,
Giue me a Taper: call vp all my people,
   Bra. Strike on the Tinder, hoa:

For thus deluding you
Let loose on me the Iustice of the State
If she be in her Chamber, or your house,
Of here, and euery where: straight satisfie your selfe.
In an extrauagant, and wheeling Stranger,
Tying her Dutie, Beautie, Wit, and Fortunes
I say againe, hath made a grosse reuolt,
Your Daughter (if you haue not giuen her leaue)
I thus would play and trifle with your Reuerence.
That from the sence of all Ciuilitie,
We haue your wrong rebuke. Do not beleeue
But if you know not this, my Manners tell me,
We then haue done you bold, and saucie wrongs.
If this be knowne to you, and your Allowance,
To the grosse claspes of a Lasciuious Moore:
But with a knaue of common hire, a Gundelier,
Transported with no worse nor better guard,
At this odde Euen and dull watch o'th' night
(As partly I find it is) that your faire Daughter,
If't be your pleasure, and most wise consent,
   Rod. Sir, I will answere any thing. But I beseech you

   Bra. This thou shalt answere. I know thee Rodorigo

   Iago. You are a Senator

   Bra. Thou art a Villaine

and the Moore, are making the Beast with two backs
  Ia. I am one Sir, that comes to tell you, your Daughter
   Bra. What prophane wretch art thou?

and Gennets for Germaines
neigh to you, you'le haue Coursers for Cozens:
couer'd with a Barbary horse, you'le haue your Nephewes
and you thinke we are Ruffians, you'le haue your Daughter
if the deuill bid you. Because we come to do you seruice,
   Ia. Sir: you are one of those that will not serue God,

In simple and pure soule, I come to you
   Rodo. Most graue Brabantio,

This is Venice: my house is not a Grange
   Bra. What tell'st thou me of Robbing?

   Rodo. Patience good Sir

To make this bitter to thee
My spirits and my place haue in their power
   Bra. But thou must needs be sure,

   Rod. Sir, Sir, Sir

To start my quiet
Vpon malitious knauerie, dost thou come
(Being full of Supper, and distempring draughtes)
My Daughter is not for thee. And now in madnesse
In honest plainenesse thou hast heard me say,
I haue charg'd thee not to haunt about my doores:
   Bra. The worsser welcome:

  Rod. My name is Rodorigo
  Bra. Not I: what are you?
  Rod. Most reuerend Signior, do you know my voice?
   Bra. What, haue you lost your wits?

Arise I say
Or else the deuill will make a Grand-sire of you.
Awake the snorting Cittizens with the Bell,
Is tupping your white Ewe. Arise, arise,
Euen now, now, very now, an old blacke Ram
Your heart is burst, you haue lost halfe your soule
  Iago. Sir, y'are rob'd, for shame put on your Gowne,
  Bra. Why? Wherefore ask you this?
  Iago. Are your Doores lock'd?
  Rodo. Signior is all your Familie within?
Summons? What is the matter there?
   Bra. Aboue. What is the reason of this terrible

Theeues, Theeues
Looke to your house, your daughter, and your Bags,
   Iago. Awake: what hoa, Brabantio: Theeues, Theeues.

   Rodo. What hoa: Brabantio, Signior Brabantio, hoa

Is spied in populus Citties
As when (by Night and Negligence) the Fire
   Iago. Doe, with like timerous accent, and dire yell,

   Rodo. Heere is her Fathers house, Ile call aloud

As it may loose some colour
Yet throw such chances of vexation on't,
Plague him with Flies: though that his Ioy be Ioy,
And though he in a fertile Clymate dwell,
Proclaime him in the Streets. Incense her kinsmen,
Rowse him, make after him, poyson his delight,
  Iago. Call vp her Father:
If he can carry't thus?
   Rod. What a fall Fortune do's the Thicks-lips owe

For Dawes to pecke at; I am not what I am
But I will weare my heart vpon my sleeue
In Complement externe, 'tis not long after
The natiue act, and figure of my heart
For when my outward Action doth demonstrate
But seeming so, for my peculiar end:
Heauen is my Iudge, not I for loue and dutie,
In following him, I follow but my selfe.
Were I the Moore, I would not be Iago:
It is as sure as you are Rodorigo,
And such a one do I professe my selfe. For (Sir)
These Fellowes haue some soule,
Doe themselues Homage.
And when they haue lin'd their Coates
Doe well thriue by them.
And throwing but showes of Seruice on their Lords
Keepe yet their hearts attending on themselues,
Who trym'd in Formes, and visages of Dutie,
Whip me such honest knaues. Others there are
For naught but Prouender, & when he's old Casheer'd.
Weares out his time, much like his Masters Asse,
That (doting on his owne obsequious bondage)
Many a dutious and knee-crooking knaue;
Cannot be truely follow'd. You shall marke
We cannot all be Masters, nor all Masters
I follow him, to serue my turne vpon him.
   Iago. O Sir content you.

  Rod. I would not follow him then
To loue the Moore?
Whether I in any iust terme am Affin'd
Stood Heire to'th' first. Now Sir, be iudge your selfe,
And not by old gradation, where each second
Preferment goes by Letter, and affection,
'Tis the cursse of Seruice;
   Iago. Why, there's no remedie.

   Rod. By heauen, I rather would haue bin his hangman

And I (blesse the marke) his Mooreships Auntient
He (in good time) must his Lieutenant be,
By Debitor, and Creditor. This Counter-caster,
Christen'd, and Heathen) must be be-leed, and calm'd
At Rhodes, at Ciprus, and on others grounds
And I (of whom his eies had seene the proofe
Is all his Souldiership. But he (Sir) had th' election;
As Masterly as he. Meere pratle (without practise)
Wherein the Tongued Consuls can propose
More then a Spinster. Vnlesse the Bookish Theoricke:
Nor the deuision of a Battaile knowes
That neuer set a Squadron in the Field,
(A Fellow almost damn'd in a faire Wife)
One Michaell Cassio, a Florentine,
For-sooth, a great Arithmatician,
I haue already chose my Officer. And what was he?
Non-suites my Mediators. For certes, saies he,
Horribly stufft with Epithites of warre,
Euades them, with a bumbast Circumstance,
But he (as louing his owne pride, and purposes)
I know my price, I am worth no worsse a place.
Off-capt to him: and by the faith of man
(In personall suite to make me his Lieutenant)
If I do not. Three Great-ones of the Cittie,
   Iago. Despise me

Thou did'st hold him in thy hate
   Rodo. Thou told'st me,

Of such a matter, abhorre me
   Ia. But you'l not heare me. If euer I did dream

As if y strings were thine, should'st know of this
That thou (Iago) who hast had my purse,
  Rodorigo. Neuer tell me, I take it much vnkindly

Enter Rodorigo, and Iago.

Actus Primus. Scoena Prima.

The Tragedie of Othello, the Moore of Venice
